City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI AUGUST 17, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, August 17, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA and THOMAS were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meeting of August 3, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Ms. Nauser.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Upon her request, Mr. Skala made a motion to allow Ms. Nauser to abstain from voting on R129-15, R130-15, and R131-15 due to a conflict of interest. Ms. Nauser noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that her family business was involved in alcohol sales. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
Upon his request, Mr. Trapp made a motion to allow Mr. Skala to abstain from voting on the Board of Health general interest in public health vacancy due to a conflict of interest. Mr. Skala noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that his spouse was an applicant. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
The agenda, including the consent agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Trapp and a second by Mr. Thomas.
SPECIAL ITEMS
Convention and Visitors Bureau Accreditation.
Mayor McDavid asked Kim Trabue, Chair of the Convention and Visitors Advisory Board, Amy Schneider, the Director of the Convention and Visitors Bureau, and the Convention and Visitors Bureau team to join him at the podium. He explained the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau had been awarded the Destination Marketing Accreditation Program seal by Destination Marketing Association International (DMAI) in July. DMAI served as the world's largest and most influential resource for destination marketing organizations with over 3,700 members, and the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau had joined over 200 destination marketing organizations to be accredited. The accreditation required 53 mandatory standards in sixteen areas, ranging from governance and financials to communications and destination development, to be met, and an additional 40 voluntary standards could be met. He noted this achievement would not have been possible without the hard work of the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau team, and asked those in attendance to join him in congratulating them on this distinguished award.
1

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS Upon receiving the majority vote of the Council, the following individuals were
appointed to the following Boards and Commissions. Mr. Skala abstained from voting on the Board of Health general interest in public health vacancy.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT Hammen, Janet, 1844 Cliff Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire May 1, 2016
BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS Noordsy, Todd, 3 Mumford Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018
BOARD OF HEALTH Skala, Mahree, 5201 Gasconade Drive, Ward 3, Term to expire August 31, 2018 Szewczyk, Michael, 1404 E. Highlands Court, Ward 5, Term to expire August 31, 2018
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION Muzzy, Doug, 2202 Potomac Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018 Noordsy, Todd, 3 Mumford Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018 Roberts, Christopher, 901 Cutters Corner Lane, Ward 6, Term to expire August 1, 2018
CITY OF COLUMBIA NEW CENTURY FUND, INC. BOARD Nolte, Robert, 113 E. El Cortez Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2017
COLUMBIA VISION COMMISSION Campbell, Chris, 4001 Meadow View Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire December 15, 2016
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION Tucker, Robert, 4604 Gage Place, Ward 4, Term to expire September 1, 2018 Wahrenbrock, Mark, 2400 Hillshire Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire September 1, 2018
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING COMMISSION Beverley, Andrew, 210 E. Ridgeley Road, Ward 5, Term to expire September 1, 2019
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL May, Timothy, Ward 4, Term to expire February 15, 2016
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT Jill Raitt - Roll carts.
Jill Raitt commented that she had lived in Boone County since 1981 and in Columbia since 2001, except from 2008-2013 when she lived in St. Louis, and it was there where she used standard roll carts for garbage and paper, glass, and tin combined recycling. She noted she had both knees and a hip replaced, and had lived with a steep driveway, and the roll carts had been easy to use. She stated they were beautifully balanced in that she could move one with only two fingers, and when full, they were easy to control going down the driveway. When empty, she could pull both up the driveway at the same time. She
2

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
explained she only had to handle refuse and recycled material twice, once in internal receptacles in the house and then into the roll carts. She noted it was not as easy in Columbia because she had to place paper into paper bags or boxes, the tin and plastic into the blue bags, and the garbage in the black bags. She pointed out her garbage was stored in a garbage can outside, which her dog tended to turnover, and her dog had never turned over the garbage in St. Louis because the roll carts included some kind of odor control. She commented that the roll carts were also safer for the refuse collectors because they did not have to handle sharp cans, broken glass, etc., and they were more secure. They were not affected by wind, rain, or snow, whereas paper bags and cardboard boxes could easily disintegrate. She stated she had not seen any overturned carts resulting in spillage in the streets as a result of roll carts, and had seen spillage more regularly with Columbia's current system. She commented that she could not wait for Columbia to move to roll carts, especially with combined recycling. She understood that might be hard to accomplish due to the City's current operations, but believed it was worth it in the end. She noted she did not understand the resistance to roll carts.
Michael Byrne - Solid Waste Utility report.
Michael Byrne stated he had been surprised by Columbia's trash and recycling system when he first moved here, and noted he had been impressed with essentially every other part of City government except for the lack of roll carts. He explained he was from New Zealand where roll carts were called wheelie-bins, and he had always thought they were wonderful. He noted he thought it was odd that he put his white trash bags from the kitchen trash container into a black trash bag and then had to find a place to store it until trash day when he then had to haul it to the street. He pointed out he ended up purchasing his own wheeliebin so he could save energy. He stated he was surprised by the controversy, and noted he had been accused of being a "City plant" by those opposed to roll carts, which he assured the Council he was not. He commented that although he wanted wheelie-bins, he had not thought about the policy reasons for it until he had been educated at the Ward 4 meeting, and believed the policy reasons were really good. He liked that this would be adopted with a payas-you throw system as it would internalize any negative externalities of people that contributed more refuse and would provide incentives in the right place for people to control their trash consumption. It would also cause greater diversion rates to recycling. He noted he had not realized City workers were suffering serious injuries from the current trash collection system, and was concerned they would continue to expose people who wanted to work as garbage collectors to injuries every week if they did not change the system. He thought the Council should consider a change to wheelie-bins on that issue alone. He commented that Columbia could look to three nearby communities, Fulton, Jefferson City, and Ashland, to see how the wheelie-bin system worked, and encouraged the Council to contact the council members of those communities. He asked the Council to support wheelie-bins.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia.
3

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
B220-15 Adopting the FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B221-15 Amending Chapter 6 of the City Code as it relates to trade permit fees. B222-15 Amending Chapter 12A of the City Code as it relates to stormwater utility charges. B223-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code as it relates to parking fees for unmetered off-street municipal parking lots and facilities and parking meter hoods. B224-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to solid waste rates and services. B225-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to sanitary sewer utility connection fees.
Item A was read by the Clerk, and B220-15, B221-15, B222-15, B223-15, B224-15, and B225-15 were given second reading by the Clerk.
Mr. Matthes provided a staff report. Mr. Skala explained Chicago, Illinois had 42 aldermen and each was allocated about $2 million so their constituents could decide how to use those funds, and asked Mr. Matthes for his thoughts. Mr. Matthes replied the City had recently purchased software called SpeakUpCoMo, and he envisioned asking members of the community to voice their opinions as to how future savings should be spent. He thought it could provide Council great input as they made decisions during the next budget year. Mr. Trapp commented that there had been a lot of community conversation for implementing the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and asked if money was in the budget for a violence interrupters program. Mr. Matthes replied the exploration of violence interruption was in the Strategic Plan, and money for it was within the $50,000 categorized as Strategic Plan Implementation. He thought they could explore the program to find the model that worked best in Columbia, and they could then fund it as part of next year's budget or amend this year's budget when they had a particular plan. Ms. Nauser understood the $128,000 that was recommended to go back into the general fund could be reprogrammed if necessary. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser understood the Council could use its discretionary funding as well. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct and explained that amount was $48,000 in the next budget. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Kevin Schults, 6860 Nelson Drive, explained he was the Chair of the Commission on Cultural Affairs and described the FY 2016 arts funding process. The Commission reviewed proposals for funding from 24 non-profit arts and culture agencies with requests totaling over $196,000. Funding recommendations were calculated based on a cap of $100,000 for the annual funding process with an additional $3,000 for the small requests funding process, which was distributed throughout the year. He commented that arts and culture organizations played a part in strengthening the community in many ways, and funding to those agencies was crucial in enhancing the lives of Columbia citizens and growing the economy. These funds allowed for high quality programming, cultural and educational opportunities to underserved populations, the leveraging of other outside funding, and bringing visitors to the City to create economic development. The funds also played an important role in strengthening the quality of life, consistently making Columbia a more desirable place to live and to do business. They estimated 163,000 people would participate in City funded arts and culture activities in the coming year. He noted the Commission
4

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
commended the Council for recognizing the importance of actively supporting the arts locally, and hoped they would continue the tradition.
Terry Crouch, the Vice Chair of the Community Development Commission, explained Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) proposals totaled $1.2 million while the City only had $839,000 available to allocate and HOME fund proposals totaled $559,000 while the City only had $389,000 available to allocate. He noted the Commission recommended the bulk of the allocation go toward homeownership assistance programs. Funding for bus shelters, Job Point vocational training, and a few other programs were also recommended by the Commission.
Jay Lindner, 1400 Forum Boulevard, provided a handout and explained the commercial trash rates within the City of Columbia were far higher than what the private market charged for similar services. He commented that the City had a monopoly on commercial trash service, but it was unable to provide an efficient service that could compete with the private sector. His company currently paid just under $36,000 annually for commercial trash for four properties, and this was about $9,000 higher than they would pay in the private market. The proposed increase as part of the FY 2016 budget would result in an annual increase of over $8,700, so they would be paying over $44,000 a year in commercial refuse rates. This was $18,000 per year above what would be charged by the private sector. He commented that they could not bid this service to the private sector because of an ordinance that stated it would be unlawful for any person other than an agent of City to haul, convey, or transport any garbage, defined as food waste, from any location within the City. This meant any dumpster containing food waste, which included all of their shopping centers, could only be emptied by the City. He noted attempts to have this ordinance removed had resulted in the comment that it was the only way to ensure adequate service occurred to maintain proper sanitary conditions for public health, which he felt was an excuse since the services of private companies were utilized in other communities. He asked the Council to reject further increases in commercial refuse rates or to lift the ordinance that provided the City with a monopoly so they could bid their trash service to the private market.
Ross Bridges, 5604 Astoria Court, stated he was the President of the Welcome Home Inc. Board of Directors and a United States Marine Corps Combat Veteran, and explained Welcome Home was a transitional housing shelter for homeless veterans. Welcome Home had been in operation since 1992 and had been founded by a group of Vietnam Veterans that had put their own money together to build the current facility. Over the years, a natural partnership had developed between Welcome Home, the Columbia Housing Authority, and the Truman V.A. Hospital as they realized they could not serve enough of the homeless veteran population. The permanent housing portion of this project, known as the Patriot Place Apartments, was completely funded. They now needed to finalize the funding for the transitional housing and supportive services portions of the project, which they would do through a capital campaign, applying for grants, and state income tax credits. He stated they were thankful to be considered for funding as part of the budget deliberations, and asked those in support of the project to stand, and approximately 20 people stood.
Mr. Skala asked how well the fundraising efforts were going. Mr. Bridges replied they had kicked off their capital campaign in December of last year and had raised 63 percent of
5

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
the funding needed to complete the project. He thought they were on pace to raise the remaining funds needed.
Sarah Froese explained she worked at the Truman V.A. Hospital where she oversaw the homeless, vocational, veteran corps, and peer support programs, and thanked the Council for its support of this project. She commented that they had about 5,000 visits from veterans that were homeless or close to being homeless in FY 2013, and the number of visits had increased to 8,000 in FY 2014. In FY 2013, 365 veterans had come in with some type of homeless issue, and in FY 2014 that number had increased to 618. This year, they were already at 700. As a result, programs such as this were desperately needed. She noted there were no male beds at the Salvation Army this weekend, and their other two contract locations were full as well. She reiterated they desperately needed this project to help take care of veterans, and noted money would be saved due to fewer visits to the emergency room and fewer incarcerations. She commented that this partnership would allow them to train veterans to obtain jobs through vocational programs on-site, and would allow those with permanent housing to ultimately leave and become contributing members of society again. She thanked the Council for its consideration in funding this project and for its support.
Phil Steinhaus, 201 Switzler Street, stated he was the CEO of the Columbia Housing Authority and noted he appreciated the City's support of Welcome Home in helping them with the first phase of their shelter. He pointed out they would have the operations in place once the buildings were constructed, which was not always the case. He commented that he was also appreciative of the funding to support Cradle to Career, which would help with the achievement gap, and the HOME funding for their Oak Towers project. He also thanked the Council for its support of the Bryant Walkway and Oak Towers renovation projects as it would renovate many public housing units. He stated he was appreciative of the focus of the Strategic Plan in terms of social equity and investing in less enfranchised aspects of the community as it recognized a lot was lost when they did not help everyone to become successful participating members of the community.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that there had been many fundraising events for the veterans, and he had recently participated in one of those events. He noted help was needed in addition to money, and asked the community to participate in future fundraising events.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid continued the public hearing to the September 8, 2015 Council Meeting.
Mayor McDavid congratulated Mr. Matthes for putting together a pretty good budget. He commented that he liked to benchmark where they stood today compared to the past, and believed it was all about the general fund, which funded public safety. He did not feel many people understood they could not use sewer funds to hire firefighters. He was happy they were able to fund four additional firefighters and three additional police officers through this budget. He noted the projected general fund increase for next year was 0.4 percent, and this concerned him because that percentage needed to match the population increase of two percent plus the inflation of two percent. Since 2005, the general fund was down $10 million when taking population and inflation increases into account. This was the reason they were short 22 police officers and 15 firefighters. Although he was happy they were able to fund an
6

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
increase in public safety officers, he noted Columbia would have substantial challenges in terms of dealing with this in the future. He applauded Mr. Matthes for the savings due to incentive based budgeting, and was happy they were paying more attention to public pensions, which he felt was the single largest fiscal threat to state and local governments over the next generation. He commented that he disagreed with the increase in sewer connection fees as Columbia already had the highest sewer connection fees in the State of Missouri.
Mr. Thomas stated his appreciation to Mr. Matthes for his focus on social equity as Columbia had two distinct populations with large gaps in between them in terms of achievement, income and wealth, public safety, quality of life, health, etc. He commented that the allocation of the cost of growth was a part of the solution in terms of allocating those costs to those choosing to move to Columbia instead of the poor families already residing here.
Mr. Skala stated he believed social equity as an overall goal was paramount, and the budget document reflected priorities and a balancing of those priorities. He commented that they funded much of the general fund and public safety through sales taxes, and were close to reaching that ceiling as they were near 10 percent. He noted the reason the general fund was not increasing as needed was due to internet sales, and unfortunately, the City could not do anything about that situation until the federal and state government changed some laws. He commented that he wanted to ensure they were prepared if there was an opportunity to collect revenues from internet sales in the future. He explained he believed financial equity was important as well, and sustainable growth was a key. He noted some in the development community had indicated to him that they understood development fees would need to be adjusted upward, but they could not agree on a model or to the extent of an increase. He believed the public and private sectors needed to share more equally in terms of costs in order to have an effective public-private partnership. He believed everyone would suffer without it. He hoped they revisited some of these issues in the context of the budget, their needs, and how they would pay for it.
Mr. Trapp complimented Mr. Matthes for a budget he believed reflected the values of the community. He commented that anyone could review the budget with an ideological lens and find something they did not support, but overall, it was reflective of the community. There was greater efficiency in that they continued to do as much as they always had, but with fewer resources when factoring in population growth and inflation. He thanked Mayor McDavid for the recommendation of spending $5 million in fund balance to pay down the pensions, and noted it would not get the kind of attention he thought it should. He thanked the Fire Department and the firefighters union for identifying potential savings in the service agreement with the Boone County Fire Protection District. He also thanked City staff for freeing up officers to work on the streets by hiring non-officers to certain positions. During his time in office, they had kept up with population growth in terms of adding public safety officers, even in tough budget times. He stated he was most pleased with the strong move to deal with homelessness issues by supporting the Welcome Home project. He noted he worked closely with Welcome Home on a daily basis, and they were an admirable organization that ran on a shoestring budget. This was a wonderful project, which he was
7

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
happy to see the City support in a real way. He reiterated he thought the budget balanced well with the values of the community, and was curious to see if the support for the Maplewood Home drew a tenth of the negative reaction the support for the Blind Boone Home had, as he did not believe it would.
Ms. Nauser thanked Mr. Matthes and City staff for their work on the budget. She also thanked the Commission on Cultural Affairs as she believed the arts and culture of Columbia helped it to stand out amongst its peers. She noted the Commission on Cultural Affairs and the Community Development Commission worked hard to ensure they had a fair and open process, so she was happy to support their recommendations for funding. She commented that she was supportive of this new way of budgeting in terms of saving money throughout the year in order to apply those savings to one time projects that were important and reflected community values. She stated she believed, as a country, they had abandoned veterans, and noted it was refreshing to see community support for veterans in Columbia. She felt the contribution by the City for the Welcome Home project was valiant and worthwhile.
Mayor McDavid reiterated the public hearing on the budget would continue at the next two Council Meetings.

(B) B219-15

Setting property tax rates for 2015 for the City of Columbia. Setting property tax rates for 2015.

Item B was read by the Clerk, and B219-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Blattel provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mayor McDavid pointed out Columbia's property tax rate was less than 50 percent of the average in the State of Missouri, and 20 percent of the property taxes of comparable university communities. This low property tax was one of the reasons for the small public safety force. Mr. Skala commented that they had essentially ceded property taxes to the Columbia Public School District. He stated police and fire services protected property so it made some sense to increase those taxes to fund those services, but that ballot issue had failed so they would need to continue to try and find efficiencies. He believed they would have to determine how to balance the needs of all of the governmental agencies at some point in the future. B219-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

OLD BUSINESS
B226-15 Calling a special election on the question whether to extend the oneeighth of one percent local parks sales tax. R135-15 Specifying how the City Council intends to use funds that would be generated by the proposed extension of the one-eighth of one percent local parks sales tax.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk, and the resolution was read by the
Clerk.

8

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood the land acquisition percentage was lower for this ballot issue than it had been in 2010, and asked for clarification. Mr. Griggs replied it was about $250,000 less for this ballot issue than it had been in 2010, and explained staff was not sure the citizens would be supportive of adding more money for preservation. In addition, they felt they would have enough money for the list of targeted acquisitions they had developed with the assistance of the Greenbelt Land Trust. He noted a closed meeting would likely occur in January to discuss priorities with regard to these acquisitions. Mr. Skala understood there was difficulty since it was not a specific project and seemed to always be a moving target. Mr. Griggs commented that if the tax brought in more money than was anticipated, the extra money could go towards acquisitions. Ms. Nauser noted a recommendation of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence was for a cultural and community center in the First Ward area, and asked if it would be possible to convert the Armory into this type of center once the Philips Park facility was built. Mr. Griggs replied currently all adult basketball and volleyball leagues played at the Armory, and those leagues along with the sports staff would be relocated to the new facility at Philips Park so time would be freed up for other events. He pointed out the community recreation staff had some ideas for the Armory, but there would still likely be free time for something other than sports leagues. Ms. Peters asked if a TDD would be used to pay for some of the items associated with the sports facility at Philips Park. Mr. Griggs replied he thought the TDD would only be involved in terms of transportation to the Park, but not anything within the Park. He pointed out he did not know the details because that TDD had a change in ownership, etc. Ms. Thompson stated that TDD was not in effect. Ms. Peters asked for further clarification. Ms. Thompson replied the original TDD was vacated, and she did not believe the second TDD included the Park, but noted they could check on it. Ms. Peters asked how much latitude the City had to move items around if there was other land acquisitions or if other funding became available to help with these projects. Mr. Griggs replied staff liked to stay on target, and preferred not to move money from a project they indicated they would do to some other project. He, however, noted each project would go through the public improvement process. He commented that if the Council wanted to increase funds for land preservation, they should ask for that change now. He explained their success had been associated with the fact staff would do what the Council had indicated would be done when asking for support of the ballot issue. Mr. Matthes pointed out this was their best guess in terms of revenues from this sales tax. If the revenue was greater than anticipated, the Council could earmark excess funds to be used toward land acquisition first. This would allow the emphasis for that priority while still allowing the other projects identified to be completed. Jan Dye, 2222 Bluff Boulevard, stated she was a member of the Environment and Energy Commission (EEC) and noted the Commission was in full support of the renewal of the one-eighth of one percent local parks sales tax. They were, however, also concerned with the reduction in the amount dedicated to acquisition and land preservation. In 2010, it was 17 percent and for 2015, it was 13.3 percent. That line item also included some trail
9

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
improvement and grant matching funds, which further reduced the amount for acquisitions. An EEC subcommittee had discussed this budget and believed the 2015 tax proposal should devote a percent similar to the 2010 tax. They felt the preservation of natural areas would only become more expensive and harder to find as Columbia grew and prospered. Purchasing undeveloped areas, for example along the Hinkson Creek, would be beneficial to the long-term preservation of natural areas.
John Corn, 100 S. Glenwood Avenue, commented that he was speaking on behalf of the Columbia Farmers Market, and stated they supported the parks sales tax extension, specifically the funds provided for the Clary-Shy improvements. He noted the Columbia Farmers Market, which was located at Clary-Shy Park, had provided fresh, locally produced farm products since the 1980s, and it continued to be the largest and most diverse farmers market serving the mid-state area. They hoped this parks sales tax extension would be the start of a permanent building that would allow them to serve more shoppers and vendors in a more amenable environment. They envisioned a sheltered space that would allow vendors and shoppers to mingle in an open and relaxed environment with products and people protected from the elements. He urged the Council for its support of making this long held dream a reality.
Adam Saunders, 214 St. Joseph Street, stated he was speaking on behalf of the Columbia Center for Urban Agriculture and noted they were in favor of this ballot initiative. They had been meeting with the Columbia Farmers Market, Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board, and City staff to explore a collaborative public-private partnership of integrating urban agriculture at the same site mentioned by Mr. Corn. They were excited about the prospect and looked forward to an exploration of how a partnership might evolve.
Kathryn Roberts, 4445 Roemer Road, explained she was the Vice-Chair of the Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board, and noted they held the lease to where the Columbia Farmers Market was located and worked closely with the Center for Urban Agriculture. She understood health was a top priority for the City of Columbia and their residents, and Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. had taken an active role in this effort through the Access to Healthy Foods program. Citizens active in receiving SNAP benefits could receive matching funds from Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. to use to shop at the Columbia Farmers Market, and that would help support the community, local growers, and those in need of accessing healthier foods. She commented that she believed the parks sales tax would further their mission through their partnership with the City of Columbia.
Annette Triplett, 201 W. Broadway, stated she was the Executive Director of the PedNet Coalition and noted they were strongly in favor of placing the park sales tax on the ballot for renewal. She commented that investments in community parks helped Columbia to be vibrant and thriving. She explained parks were an economic driver as they encouraged people to move to communities, and listed statistics from a study conducted by the University of Missouri, which indicated many people tended to choose to live on property near trails and that those trails positively improved their quality of life. She pointed out the parks sales tax also contributed to the creation of active transportation options by building out the trail network. She commented that the top three priorities of the PedNet Coalition Board of the trail projects being considered by the Parks and Recreation Department were the Hinkson
10

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Creek Trail, the Bear Creek Trail, and the COLT Railroad Trail. She pointed out the Perche Creek Trail had been ranked the lowest in terms of priority by the PedNet Coalition Board. They understood the Bear Creek Trail had to be removed from the project list, but were happy to see the inclusion of the Hinkson Creek Trail. She explained they felt the Perche Creek Trail should the lowest in priority because it was in the Fourth Ward, which already had the MKT Trail and was the closest to the Katy Trail. It was not considered a high need area compared to the Second and Third Wards, which had fewer trails and higher proportions of lower income populations, who typically had less access to park and trail facilities. She noted they favored the COLT Railroad Trail as it would serve the Third, First, and Second Wards and connect to the downtown. If it was not possible to include the COLT Railroad Trail on this project list, she asked that it be given a high priority for future trail funding.
Paul Blythe explained he represented the Diamond Council of Columbia, Missouri, which was a softball and baseball league that utilized the Antimi Sports Complex, OaklandAlbert Park, the Atkins Baseball Complex, and American Legion Park, and they wholeheartedly supported placing the parks sales tax on the ballot. He noted they had served approximately 3,000 kids this year, and had a scholarship program for those in need. He understood the parks sales tax money would go towards fixing issues on some existing fields and developing new fields. He reiterated their support for this sales tax on the ballot.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that he was not supportive of an athletic complex being placed on the Philips Lake property because he believed it would only be utilized by the rich or those that were Catholic. He felt a location in the First Ward should be considered for a sports complex, and pointed out the ARC was not accessible for people in need. He suggested a complex that could be assessable to everyone in the public.
Ms. Nauser commented that Council had previously discussed the percentages by categories and had based much of those discussions on the citizen survey. She thought that was the reason there had been a decrease in funding for land preservation and an increase in funding for taking care of the facilities the City already had. She also believed the complex at Philips Park would allow the City to repurpose the Armory for the youth in the central city. She noted she supported placing the sales tax on the ballot in November.
Mr. Skala stated he liked the idea of dedicating any excess revenues from this sales tax to land acquisition so they were not forced to pass up on any acquisition opportunities. He also thought they should get close to the funding amount on the previous ballot issue. He commented that the Hinkson Creek Trail had not been funded back in 2009-2010 because it had been very controversial, and the COLT Railroad Trail had not made the cut then due the limited amount of funds remaining. He understood the COLT Railroad Trail would be considered during the next opportunity, and believed this might be the time to consider it.
Mayor McDavid commented that he believed there was inherent flexibility because the Marketplace Fairness Act could pass or parks sales tax revenues could be higher than anticipated, and the Council at that time could choose its own priorities with those funds.
Mr. Skala stated he felt strongly about allocating extra funds to land acquisition, but also felt they needed to address some particular projects, such as the COLT Railroad Trail.
Ms. Peters asked staff how funds could be shifted to increase the amount allocated to land acquisition. Mr. Griggs replied the Waters-Moss Phase II Improvements involved
11

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
contracting for the renovations of the Waters House at a cost estimate of $125,000 and that work could potentially be done by City staff. In addition to eliminating that project from the project list, he thought the Annual Park Improvements ­ Major Maintenance project could be reduced by $125,000. This $250,000 could then go to the Annual Land Acquisition project so it was the same amount it had been for the 2010 ballot issue.
Mr. Griggs pointed out the reason the COLT Railroad Trail had not been included in this project list was because they did not know the status of the COLT Railroad. He explained that if Boone County Lumber relocated and there was no longer a need for the railroad to travel downtown, they would have a ready-made trail. He noted staff felt they should hold off on the COLT Railroad Trail until they knew what the future held. They were concerned with taking a trail across the Business Loop as it would require a bridge and involve the intersection of the Business Loop and Paris Road.
Mr. Skala understood the Municipal Power Plan might not use coal in the future, which would impact the railroad and the hesitation in moving forward with the COLT Railroad Trail project now, but noted he was also concerned that it would continue to be delayed as it had been discussed since about 2009. He thought it was a critical piece of the trail network. Mr. Griggs stated the COLT Railroad Trail was a priority for staff as well, but they believed the Hinkson Creek Trail ­ Stephens to Clark Lane could be accomplished more easily and that entire side would then be connected to the downtown.
Mr. Thomas asked if funds had already been allocated for the Grindstone to Stephens Lake projects, Options 1 and 3. Mr. Griggs replied no if he was referring to the Shepard to Rollins project. He understood a study was currently being conducted and that some of the 2010 parks sales tax funds might be used for it if there was enough funding. Mr. Thomas asked if he thought the project could be accomplished with GetAbout funding and the surplus from the last sales tax. Mr. Griggs replied he believed the project was dependent upon the University of Missouri, and once staff knew what would be allowed on that property, they could determine the cost and whether they had enough funding for it. He thought they would be close, but noted he was uncertain.
Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend R135-15 so the Annual Park Improvements ­ Major Maintenance project was reduced $125,000, the Waters-Moss Phase II Improvements project, which had been funded at $125,000, was eliminated, and the Annual Land Acquisition: Parks, Greenways and Natural Areas project was increased by $250,000. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote.
Mr. Trapp commented that he had participated on the parks ballot committee and noted he had been impressed by staff as they were driven by survey and were trying to be receptive to the needs of the entire community. He noted they also did a good job of providing a high level of detail with regard to all of the neighborhood parks and improvements. He explained it had been an open process, and this great product level was not accomplished by accident. He stated he was happy to support this.
Mr. Thomas agreed with Mr. Trapp and felt staff did a great job of polling citizens, studying the data, making promises on deliverable improvements, and delivering on those improvements. He commented that the ARC and the Columbia Farmers Market were on the Clary-Shy Park property, which also included a large area of unused land, and believed the
12

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Farmers Market was a tremendous asset for the community in terms of an economic driver as 3,000 people purchased healthy local foods from it every Saturday for about eight months per year. He felt the Farmers Market would not reach its full potential without a shelter as more people would likely visit if there was a shelter. In addition, the Farmers Market could operate year-round. He explained there was a coalition of three non-profits in this effort, and noted the Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board also ran the Access to Healthy Foods program, which tied well with the social equity goals of the City's strategic plan, and the Center for Urban Agriculture employed people and produced healthy local food. He thought supporting a project such as that would create a healthy and viable economic program in a great location in the center of town, and asked that a work session be scheduled to discuss this if the park sales tax passed.
B226-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
The vote on R135-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
B227-15 Approving the Administrative Plat of Creek Ridge, Plat No. 1-A, a Replat of Lots 1-14, 27-31, 34-49 and 76-77 of Creek Ridge Plat No. 1, located on the south side of Old Plank Road and west of Bethel Church Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting continued approval of a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction subject to conditions.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas asked for the staff recommendation in 2005 with regard to the sidewalk variance. Mr. Teddy replied he did not recall, but thought the issue had been thoroughly vetted at the time. In looking at the request this year, staff had reviewed whether the conditions had changed, and nothing had been done with the road. The subdivision across the street, which was a row of single-family homes, did not have a sidewalk either. He noted there were three projects between Providence Road and the end of Old Plank Road at Route K that had installed sidewalks, but he believed those conditions had been more conducive to installing sidewalks in accordance with the standards of the City. Mr. Thomas understood there was a pedway on the west side of Forum Boulevard that would align with the pedway for this development. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and described its route. Mr. Thomas understood the pedway on Forum Boulevard connected to Southampton Drive and Nifong Boulevard. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas asked if it would be possible to construct a pedestrian crossing across Old Plank Road to link the pedway in the development to the pedway that provided access to the rest of Columbia. Mr. Teddy replied he thought they would need to consult with the Public Works Department on that issue. Mr. Skala commented that this project had initially been approved prior to the time the Council had set a priority toward ensuring sidewalks were in place, and understood the argument in terms of topography issues, but felt this subdivision should be connected in
13

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
some manner. Mr. Teddy stated the two points of connectivity for pedestrians would be the north-south pedway system and a trail connection, which he showed on the map on the overhead.
Mayor McDavid understood this was an administrative replat of one lot, and it had already been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. He did not believe the Council was re-reviewing the entire process. Mr. Teddy explained the Council was reviewing the continued approval of a variance as part of their action tonight. Mayor McDavid understood the variance had previously been granted, and this was only a replat. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and pointed out staff had approved permits to resume construction on this subdivision. The property had been platted by a previous owner, and Mr. Overton, who had acquired the property in its entirety, wanted to privatize the common area so he could construct larger lots. The reconfigured plat had been submitted to the City after staff had issued construction permits for the infrastructure.
Tim Crockett, 2608 N. Stadium Boulevard, commented that this was simply an administrative replat as they wanted to extend some lots lines into the previously platted common lot. He pointed out a temporary construction easement would be granted for Old Plank Road as part of this project, and that meant the City would not have to expend money trying to acquire those easements later when Old Plank Road was improved. He explained the replat would allow for larger lots, and the trees would not be any less preserved.
Ms. Nauser stated this was in the Fifth Ward and agreed there was a steep slope associated with the project. She noted she would support this administrative replat since nothing would change other than the size of the lots. She commented that she planned to honor the variances approved by a previous Council.
B227-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

B234-15 Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for tobacco control coalition services; appropriating funds.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Ms. Browning provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser made a motion to amend B234-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. B234-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B218-15

Amending Chapter 2 of the City Code relating to conflicts of interest and financial disclosure procedures.

14

B228-15

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Approving the Final Plat of On The Ninth At Old Hawthorne, Plat No. 1, a Replat of Lot 3-A of Old Hawthorne Plat No. 1-A, located east of the intersection of Old Hawthorne Drive West and Pergola Drive; authorizing a performance contract.

B229-15

Authorizing a contract for sale of real estate with Columbia Community Development Corporation II for the purchase of property located at 109, 111 and 113 Lynn Street.

B230-15

Declaring the need to acquire easements for construction of the MKT to Parkade Bike Boulevard Project.

B231-15

Authorizing a right of use permit with McAlester Park, LLC for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private storm sewer and retaining wall in a portion of the Ninth Street and Elm Street rights-of-way.

B232-15

Authorizing Amendment 3 to the general cooperative agreement with the Boone County Regional Sewer District relating to sewer service within the Midway area and financial participation in the construction of the Henderson Branch Sewer Extension project.

B233-15 Accepting a conveyance for utility purposes.

B235-15

Appropriating funds received from donations and miscellaneous revenue to the Parks and Recreation Department.

B236-15

Appropriating funds received from the Columbia Chamber of Commerce relating to the construction of repairs and upgrades to the Thomas G. Walton Building.

B237-15

Accepting a donation from Boone Electric Cooperative to be used by the Fire Department for the purchase of public education supplies relating to fire prevention; appropriating funds.

R129-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages for a Ninth Street SummerFest concert.

R130-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages along portions of Park Avenue and Orr Street for the annual Mid-Missouri PrideFest celebration.

R131-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages along an alley between Eighth Street and Ninth Street for a wedding reception at Broadway Brewery.

R132-15

Authorizing an agreement with the Memorial Day Weekend - Salute to Veterans Corporation for an air show to be held at Columbia Regional Airport May 25 - 30, 2016; authorizing the City Manager to provide support services for the Memorial Day activities planned by that organization; and authorizing a parachute jump onto Broadway.

R133-15 Approving the by-laws of the Gary-Atkins Neighborhood Association.

R134-15

Expressing support for the Columbia Housing Authority's applications to the Missouri Housing Development Commission for low income housing tax credits.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER (except for R129-15, R130-15, and R131-15 on which

15

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
she abstained), PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS

None.

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING

The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

PR136-15 Establishing a revised policy relating to the repair, maintenance and restoration of brick paved streets in the City of Columbia.

B238-15

Approving the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 located on the

northwest corner of

Strawn Road (Route ZZ) and West Broadway;

authorizing a performance contract; granting variances from the

Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction and direct

driveway access; setting forth conditions for approval.

B239-15

Approving the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision, a Replat of Lot 11 and part of Lot 10 of R.B. Price's Subdivision, located on the east side of Melbourne Street and the north side of Windsor Street (204 Melbourne Street and 1403 Windsor Street); granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction.

B240-15

Vacating a water and electric easement within Vesser's Subdivision Plat No. 2 located on the west side of Fourth Street and south of Conley Avenue.

B241-15

Authorizing a consolidated grant agreement with the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission for transportation planning services.

B242-15

Authorizing construction of a solid waste administration and collection operations facilities building at the Columbia Sanitary Landfill; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division; appropriating funds.

B243-15

Authorizing a road improvement agreement with Boone County, Missouri relating to the Scott Boulevard Phase III project; appropriating funds.

B244-15

Authorizing a first amended and restated development agreement with Jeffrey E. Smith Investment Co. relating to property located on the southeast corner of Nifong Boulevard and Bethel Street.

B245-15

Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to revise the speed limit on portions of Providence Road and State Route K.

B246-15

Authorizing a license agreement with Tripwire, Inc. to provide cybersecurity tools as part of the Energy Management System (EMS) implementation.

B247-15 Accepting a conveyance for utility purposes.

B248-15

Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Teen Outreach Program (TOP).

B249-15

Authorizing an easement release agreement with Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. and the Mary M. Hackett Trust No. 1 relating to the vacation of sewer easements located on the southeast corner of Providence Road and Broadway conditioned upon construction of new sewer facilities within public rights-of-way and surface parking areas.

16

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting

REP81-15 Fraternity/Sorority Sprinkling.

Fire Chief White provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if a waiver could be granted in terms of liability. He commented that the City had recommended a sprinkler system be installed, but the organization chose not to comply, so he wondered if that organization could then be responsible if there was a fire. Ms. Thompson understood Mayor McDavid was referring to an indemnity clause with higher insurances in place instead of a waiver. Mayor McDavid asked if the Council would be amenable to that type of scenario. Mr. Skala commented that it would be a disaster if anyone was hurt due to these houses not being sprinkled. He explained he would be amenable to providing more time, but did not want to provide another three years. He suggested one year with benchmarks to determine progress. Mr. Ruffin understood some of the fraternity houses were involved in capital campaigns to build new facilities, and that would likely not be accomplished within a year as they had projected three years or more. He asked what type of benchmarks they would want to see. Chief White replied they would want to know continuous progress was being made toward the goal. He pointed out one of the reasons the initial time frame was seven years was because these were extensive projects that might be difficult in terms of raising money. They were now close to the end of that seven-year period and six houses had not yet complied. He explained the difficulty with extending it further with no benchmarks was that there was no incentive to continually progress to an end solution. His concern was that some of these houses would still not be compliant at the end of another three-year extension. Ms. Peters noted two houses had come to the Council to request extensions, and asked about the plans for the other four houses. Chief White replied the others had not contacted the Fire Department. Ms. Thompson pointed out there were significant differences between the two requests made to Council. One request involved a three-month extension, and the other involved a longer period. She commented that the deadline was March 16, 2016. In terms of liability, there was not much difference between the start of the spring semester and when the students moved out as the same students would be there the entire time. She thought extending the deadline to the end of the semester was very different than extending it for number of years since many other homes had already complied. Mayor McDavid asked if it would be appropriate to extend it to the end of the semester. Ms. Nauser asked if they also wanted to look at a one year extension with benchmarks. Mr. Skala thought they could extend it multiple times, but believed they wanted to ensure there was pressure so progress was made. Mayor McDavid suggested only extending it to the end of the semester, and placing the onus on those houses that had not complied to ask Council for more time as they would otherwise be shut down for the following school year. Ms. Nauser asked which houses had already asked for an extension. Chief White replied Sigma Nu and Delta Tau Delta. Ms. Nauser understood those two had the largest

17

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
occupancies, which likely meant they had larger homes requiring more of a capital campaign. She wondered if the smaller ones had capital campaigns or had planned on being compliant by the deadline. She asked if they knew the status of the other four houses. Chief White replied they did not, and noted there had not been any permit requests. He pointed out staff had reached out via e-mail and certified letter to remind them of the deadline.
Mr. Skala agreed with the suggestion of an extension to the end of the school year. Ms. Nauser agreed anyone that could not comply by then would have to make a very good pitch for any extension. She wondered if they would allow for different extensions for different houses.
Mr. Matthes commented that he agreed it made a difference in terms of whether they planned to build a new building or retrofit the existing home with a sprinkler system. He commented that many apartment buildings and fraternity and sorority houses had already complied so it was achievable. He thought they could give everyone until the end of the semester and pull the occupancy permit for any houses that were not in compliance, meaning no one would live in the houses the following school year, unless the Council was shown how they planned to sprinkle the buildings.
Ms. Peters asked if that meant the deadline would be extended to June 1, 2016, and any house not compliant would have to make its case. Ms. Nauser thought they might want an ultimate deadline as she did not want to provide a three-year extension, and then be asked for another extension.
Chief White explained it would be helpful to staff if they could determine the process by which to request an extension beyond the initial extension of the end of the semester. He noted each house would likely be at different stages and would then come to Council at different times for an extension. He suggested a process outside of coming to Council at which a majority of the work could be done.
Mr. Skala understood a few suggestions had been made in the memo. Mayor McDavid commented that he was not sure he would know what benchmarks to apply. Chief White stated physical items would be easier to monitor in terms of benchmarks, and provided examples such as the water supply, plans from a certified fire sprinkler installer, etc. He was not sure how they would monitor or enforce any fundraising benchmarks. Mayor McDavid asked if staff was recommending the third recommendation. Mr. Skala replied he did not believe they were since those benchmarks applied to longer extensions.
Chief White suggested providing an extension to June 1, 2016, and any house unable to comply by that date would go to staff with a plan so appropriate benchmarks could be established for each particular situation since some would want to demolish the existing structure and build a new one while others would retrofit the existing structure. Each extension could be tailored for each unique circumstance.
Mr. Skala thought that was a good idea. Mayor McDavid asked if staff could move forward based on this consensus. Chief White replied yes.
Mr. Trapp understood some people predicted the demise of fraternities and sororities based on this sprinkling requirement when it had been discussed almost seven years ago, and pointed out that had not occurred.
18

REP82-15 Solid Waste Utility.

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting

Mayor McDavid commented that this was the first time he had seen information monetizing the impact of not changing the solid waste system, and understood employment costs, workman compensation costs, recruitment costs, etc. would result in close to $3 million over the next ten years. He noted if the citizens wanted to continue with the existing system, the City could charge enough to cover those costs. He understood the recommendation of staff was to wait until the initiative petition process played out since there was one in progress. Mr. Glascock replied yes, and pointed out this would not prevent them from going to a "pay as you throw" system. It only involved roll carts.
Mr. Glascock pointed out the forecast had been provided to Council by e-mail today as it had inadvertently been left out of the report.
Mr. Skala stated he thought it was good advice to wait until the initiative petition process was played out. He appreciated how the data was illustrated in graphics, etc. as it was helpful for him.
Mr. Thomas noted the report included examples with three cart options, and asked if there was a smaller roll cart than the 35-38 gallon roll cart. Mr. Glascock replied he thought the smallest one the City had looked into was 32 gallons, and that was about the smallest they could obtain. Mr. Thomas understood the 35 gallon roll cart would hold 2-3 trash bags and many people only produced one half-full trash bag. Ms. Buffaloe explained the communities that had the very small, narrow roll carts had a different style truck that was made for a more urban environment. If they tried to utilize those smaller roll carts with standard trucks, the cart had the potential to be crushed or fall into the bin, which would result in a loss of the workers compensation savings.
Mr. Thomas commented that England had a system of alternating trash and recycle weeks so trash and recycling was built up for two weeks instead of one, and asked if that had been considered. Mr. Glascock replied it had, but noted it resulted in the same costs.
Mayor McDavid understood the Columbia Daily Tribune had conducted an unscientific poll of 93 people, and a half did not care, a third wanted wheelie-bins, and one-sixth wanted to continue with the current system. He noted this was what made the decision so difficult, and suggested they allow it to play out.
Mr. Glascock pointed out this involved three departments and they had not had any conceived notions when they began this process. He noted the City was often criticized for having a solution prior to going into a process, which was the reason they purposely did not go in with a solution, and they were still criticized.
Mr. Thomas asked if staff had indicated the City might move forward with a "pay as you throw" system without wheelie-bins. Mr. Glascock replied that was an option. He noted they could do "pay as you throw" bags, a hybrid, etc., and pointed out he thought they should move forward with some "pay as you throw" system as it tended to increase recycling rates. Mayor McDavid asked if it had to be done as part of next year's budget. Mr. Glascock replied it was not a part of the budget. Mr. Matthes reiterated the budget was balanced without it.
Mayor McDavid suggested they not move forward with "pay as you throw" yet. Mr. Thomas understood he would prefer to continue with the current system until they saw how the petition process played out. Mayor McDavid stated that was correct.
19

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser commented that she was supportive of a "pay as you throw" system and had an issue with throwing plastic bags into plastic bags. In addition, if they were still providing bags, the issues related to workers compensation would continue. She thought they needed to find a "pay as you throw" system that did not require throwing plastic bags into plastic bags, would accommodate separate clear bags for yard waste, and would not require workers to pick up excessively heavy bags even if it meant smaller bags. Mr. Glascock agreed it would help tremendously if they could reduce 50 pound bags to 25 pounds. Mr. Skala pointed out 25 pounds was heavy for some people.
Mayor McDavid felt the consensus of Council was that something would change. Mr. Trapp commented that he had been impressed with the report and the public engagement process, and noted he was supportive of a hybrid system. He suspected the issue of roll carts would go to the vote of the people, and suggested they not impose it on the people. He understood particular people not wanting roll carts, but did not feel it was reasonable to not allow someone else to have a roll cart. He thought telegraphing their intentions toward a hybrid system would be the best option to be able to have any type of roll carts, and noted he believed the worker safety issue was the most compelling issue.
REP83-15 Environment and Energy Commission - 2015 International Energy Efficiency Code for Residential and Commercial Structures.
Mayor McDavid stated he believed this recommendation should be passed on to the Building Construction Codes Commission for their review even though he thought they would oppose it. Mr. Skala thought that had been past custom, and agreed the Building Construction Codes Commission and the Environment and Energy Commission should have those conversations. He stated he believed energy efficiency was a win-win situation as the cost of energy would go down in a permanent way, but there would be some people that would argue this would increase the cost of construction, which was why he thought the two groups should discuss it further.
REP84-15 Columbia Municipal Power Plant.
Mr. Johnsen and Mr. Johanningmeier provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood the Municipal Power Plant provided capacity in terms of energy, and asked if the judicial rulings involving mercury had been discussed as well. Mr. Johanningmeier replied the Environmental Pollution Agency (EPA) ruling was with a similar but different rule. It was the Utility MACT rule, which affected larger boilers. This boiler was relatively small and was actually covered under the Industrial Boiler MACT rule. Mr. Johnsen clarified they were not affected by the utility mercury rules. Mr. Skala understood this would significantly affect the railroad as well since the City would no longer use coal. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct, and noted staff would conduct a business planning process for the railroad next year to evaluate the impacts to the railroad and what could be done with regard to the railroad. Mr. Skala asked what would happen to the boiler if there was not a future for it. Mr. Johnsen replied there were four boilers at the Plant, and two were natural gas boilers while the other two were solid fuel boilers, so there would be generation at the Plant with the
20

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
natural gas boilers for the foreseeable future. Mr. Skala understood the boilers that were not used would be decommissioned. Mr. Johanningmeier pointed out the Plant contained old boilers from the early part of the last century. They were essentially abandoned in place. Mr. Johnsen noted Boiler No. 6 was the oldest working boiler now, and Boiler Nos. 1-4 were still in the Plant. He reiterated staff wanted the Council to know they were likely done combusting coal at the Municipal Power Plant as of October 13, 2015.
Mr. Trapp asked if any of these changes would affect any of the City's existing power purchase agreements. Mr. Johnsen replied no. He pointed out the Council authorized a capacity contract a few months ago, and that would replace some of the capacity these boiler units produced. He explained they had some system operational issues because these old plants had been designed to be integral to the substations, which meant they were tied closely as a transmission line was not involved. As a result, staff would have to work through the long-term impact on the system of the operational effects this Plant had on the substations. Ms. Thompson stated she thought there was a coal purchase agreement that the City would have to discontinue, and they might have to resell some of the coal. She thought there could be some other minor obligations, but did not believe there were any longterm contracts. Mr. Johnsen commented that the contract had included language indicating it could be terminated based upon regulatory changes. If that was not acceptable for some reason, they would resell the coal as there was a market. He thought it might result in a small financial impact.
REP85-15 Vision Commission - Media Mention Reports.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP86-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, stated his appreciation for funding the Welcome Home project and believed they would soon need to think about working with the homeless that were housed at the Wilkes Methodist Church. He thought a campaign would be needed to raise money for them.
Mr. Elkin understood a CID had been established on the Business Loop, and felt any additional taxes would negatively impact those in the First Ward due to their income levels.
Mr. Elkin commented that the losses in revenue were due to the fact people could shop elsewhere and did not have to come to Columbia to find a particular item.
Mr. Elkin stated he believed the lives of firefighters were just as important as the lives of police officers or anyone else, and asked the Council to not provide too long of extensions for the houses that still needed to install sprinkler systems.
Mr. Elkin commented that he thought the majority of citizens did not want roll carts, and suggested the Council move on to other items, such as smaller bags as mentioned by Ms. Nauser.
Mr. Elkin stated he did not believe the utilities should be raised any further as it negatively impacted the poor.
21

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, explained he was on the Building Construction Codes Commission, which had wrestled with the issue of fire sprinklers in fraternity and sorority houses, and noted he supported the three-year extension as long as there were benchmarks to show good intentions. He pointed out he was not speaking on behalf of the Commission and was only providing his opinion.
Mr. Shanker stated he was a member of the Board of Electrical Examiners, and noted they had increased their fees about three years. He understood the need to increases to support staff in the Building and Site Division, but asked if any cuts could be made in that division to help reduce the increase in fees.
Mary Sapp, 3405 Creasy Springs Road, commented that she had a notice for one of the solid waste ward meetings, and it had indicated the City wanted ideas and that their voices would be part of a report to the Council and be used to inform the City of potential changes. She noted a vote had been taken at five of the six ward meetings, and the results of those votes had not been included in the solid waste report. The majority of people at every session was against roll carts and wanted to retain the bag system. She pointed out they had other suggestions from those meetings that would address workers compensation, worker retention, and recycling, and noted they had also requested time at a pre-council meeting to reveal those suggestions made by the community. She again asked for time at a pre-council meeting to discuss these issues with the Council.
Bob Cunningham stated he was an architect that represented two of the fraternity houses that had not yet complied with the installation of a sprinkler system, and those houses were Delta Tau Delta and Lamba Chi Alpha. He appreciated the consideration by Council of an extension of the deadline on sprinkler issue for fraternities that were seriously considering the constructing of a new house as he believed that would be beneficial to the City. He displayed images of the insides of fraternity houses, and stated that if a sprinkler system was required to be installed in an existing facility, it might not operate correctly due to the lofts and other items located near the ceiling in existing fraternities. He commented that his firm had designed a number of bedroom types to specifically prevent this problem, and displayed images illustrating their designs in new construction that would allow for a sprinkler system to correctly work. He noted as a student had passed away due to a fire in the Sigma Chi house in 1999 because he had been in a student built loft that had been enclosed with drywall, and pointed out he was not certain a sprinkler system would have saved him because the enclosed loft might have blocked the sprinkler system from reaching the fire or blocked the smoke from setting off the alarm. He reiterated they could incorporate sprinkler systems that would operate correctly in the designs of newly constructed homes.
Tyree Byndom explained he resided in the Third Ward and stated he was representing a loosely organized group known as the Columbia Egalitarian Cooperative, which included about 100 citizens of Columbia from 12-15 groups. They were asking for the immediate resignation of Dale Roberts of the Columbia Police Officers Association (CPOA). He noted they did not have issues with any Columbia police officers, but did not feel Mr. Roberts was
22

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
bringing civic pride and creating unity to the community with his posts on the CPOA Facebook page. If Columbia police officers were a part of that system, he believed an alternative was needed. He commented that he had participated on the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, whose members had collaborated with many in the community to tackle some ancient issues faced in the United States. He listed and discussed items that had come from the report completed by the Task Force. He noted trust between the community and local law enforcement agencies had been listed as there was a trust gap between the African-American community and local law enforcement agencies, which needed to aggressively be addressed by the Police Department and the community. Robust and effective cultural competency training was needed for the Police Department and the Columbia Public Schools to provide avenues for relationship building. The implementation of a system of accountability with independent verification and public participation of the vision, mission, and goals, and the implementation of a system of professional development and promotion to train and retain of the best officers in terms of the rewards of softer skills of relationship building, community involvement, and cultural competency were also included recommendations in the report. In addition, they needed to help officers to feel appreciated and respected. He commented that the Columbia Egalitarian Cooperative would aggressively try to work with the City to ensure a robust process occurred, and asked the Council to view this as a huge issue. He stated his review of the budget did not show specific funding for the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and noted he thought that was necessary.
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, commented that her concerns were the same as those of Mr. Byndom, and noted she was disappointed the budget did not address the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She believed they all needed to become more comfortable says black people had an almost 16 percent unemployment rate, which was awful, and that they should be specific with regard to what they were doing to improve that situation. She commented that she believed it was problem to make the assumption black people were committing all of the crimes and to profile based on that assumption. She stated there were race, perception, and trust problems in Columbia as well as a financial priority problem. She asked the Council to help her find where those priorities were in the budget. She pointed out that one of the reasons the situations in Ferguson, Missouri and Baltimore, Maryland had occurred was because the financial priorities for African-Americans, poor people, and those that were underserved had been historically ignored, and she believed that was happening in Columbia as well.
Mr. Matthes explained he had e-mailed the City Council last week indicating he could not recommend a public safety ballot in the future due to the Facebook post of Dale Roberts of the CPOA because he estimated a ballot would not pass given the incendiary nature of those comments and the ongoing nature of the international gaffs of Mr. Roberts, which undermined public confidence in Columbia police officers. He noted he had heard from police officers that the comment he made last week had made them feel uncertain about the future, and that he was penalizing them for the actions of the attorney of their union, and this pained him. He commented that while he was not empowered to place any ballot on an
23

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
election cycle, he did not want his words to make Columbia police officers question his support for them. He explained he was therefore taking back his statement of not recommending a ballot, and noted he would work to prepare a public safety ballot to place before the Council in 2017. He, however, saw no scenario in which it would pass until the CPOA dealt with its public relations nightmare. He commented that he continued to condemn the Facebook post of Mr. Roberts and his ongoing series of gaffs, which served to undermine all of the support the City had worked to build in terms of community relations.
Ms. Nauser stated she supported the Columbia Police Department and the fine men and women who kept the community safe. Since her re-election almost two years ago, she noted she had supported almost $3.2 million in budget increases, which included the FY 2016 budget, the addition of nine new officers, the unsuccessful 2015 ballot, which would have increased the number of police officers to a more acceptable level that was consistent with community growth, and the CIP ballot, which would create two police substations to make the community safer. She explained she was a co-chair of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence and that she had supported the pension solution that lowered the City's unfunded pension liabilities and strengthened the pension fund for public safety personnel. She stated she would continue to support the fine men and women of the Columbia Police Department within the fiscal constraints, but noted she did not support the public comments of the Columbia Police Officers Association (CPOA) representative, Dale Roberts. She commented that Mr. Roberts had continued to follow a pattern of sexist, racist, and divisive comments over the past two years. He had a pattern of posting incendiary comments, and then claiming his statements were misunderstood and apologizing for everyone's misunderstanding. She described some of those comments. In March 2013, he posted a Facebook comment regarding the replacement of the SWAT vehicle indicating they should purchase a Mercedes 6x16 as their new vehicle so the boys in the hood would all come running out of their houses to check out the vehicle. In April 2013, he commented that an illegal strip search was customer service on a Facebook post referencing sexual assault charges being filed against Texas police officers. In 2014, he sent a personal Christmas card to citizens within the community with the front cover being a photo of a car burning in Ferguson, Missouri under a "season's greeting" sign and a personal comment on the inside saying "only seven more days of looting until Christmas." Last weekend, he called for a commemorative day on Facebook honoring the tragic situation whereby Officer Darren Wilson had to use the highest power granted as a police officer in the taking of another person's life as Darren Wilson Day ­ August 9, 2015. She pointed out his comments brought national and international attention to the community and the fine men and women of the Columbia Police Department and the police profession in general, and added to the growing negative and sometimes hostile sentiments against police officers from all demographics and regions of the country. She noted the CPOA Board had never condemned or addressed the comments, and wondered why they were silent. She understood the CPOA Board and its members had every right to keep and retain the services of Mr. Roberts, and quoted Dietrich Bonhoeffer as saying "not to speak is to speak, not to act is to act." The only actions and words she had seen was the continued pattern by Mr. Roberts of incendiary statements, the
24

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
claim of his misunderstandings, and his apologies for such misunderstandings. Unfortunately, she had not seen actions or words from the CPOA organization that discredit or seek to end these comments that disgraced the community, the fine men and women of the police force, and the police force in general. She hoped the community could heal from these comments and noted she, Mr. Trapp, and others planned to further discuss the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She understood there was money in the budget associated with some Task Force recommendations although it was not specifically referenced, and explained the new parks facility that would potentially be built at Philips Lake Park would free up space in the Armory to potentially be a centralized location for a cultural and community center for the youth. She knew there had been a lot of good officers and people in the community that had done a lot of great things, and hoped this would not set relations too far back.
Mr. Skala explained he had been out of town for almost two weeks without internet access, and had just recently become aware of this situation, which he believed was embarrassing. He noted he appreciated the comments of Mr. Matthes. The Facebook posts of Mr. Roberts did not speak well of him or help in the relationship between the community and its police officers. He pointed out his daughter was a seven year veteran on the Columbus, Ohio Police Department and he had graduated from the Citizens Police Academy, which involved several ride-a-longs and exposure to a TASER® for 30 seconds. He supported Mr. Matthes' support of the Columbia Police Department, and himself supported the Columbia Police Department in general. He suspected the perceptions related to crime were a result of continuously being bombarded with crime statistics. He commented that it was difficult to do anything about drive-by shootings of two different gangs shooting at each other, and agreed there were issues involving disparities in the community. He believed Columbia had a race problem, and noted there were indicators in the budget. He stated public safety along with infrastructure was prime movers of government, and he would argue public safety was a part of infrastructure. He thought they all needed to work together, and did not feel they should throw grenades to make a point. He commented that he planned to respond to the e-mails he had received when he was gone during the next couple of days.
Mr. Ruffin thanked Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp and Mr. Byndom for coming to the Council Meeting and sharing their thoughts, concerns, and responses to the budget and the issues plaguing the community as it had created an opportunity for the Council to become accountable for the decisions they would make within the next few weeks so they addressed some of these systemic issues. He also thanked Ms. Nauser for a thoughtful, passionate, and comprehensive response. He commented that as he reflected on the events of the past week or so, he felt the Facebook post had given new energy to the social equity discussion. He believed it revealed what they liked to ignore. He stated they all thought they lived in a cosmopolitan community where everyone was treated fairly and equally with opportunities for everyone, which was not necessarily the case. He commented that as he had presented the vision for social equity in the strategic plan of the City, he had met some resistance from people who did not believe it was necessary, but the comments that had been posted on Facebook had revealed that there was a problem in Columbia. He viewed this as an
25

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
unfortunate, embarrassing, and very sad state of affairs, but in looking at it in a deeper way, he realized it provided an opportunity to talk clearly about the problem instead of theoretically. It was real and it was in Columbia. He noted the positive was that the Council had the opportunity to do something about it instead of waiting for a grassroots movement to rise up. The Council had the leverage, latitude, budgets, ideas, connections, etc. to begin to address the problems immediately. He pointed out he only had two more years on the Council so he wanted to see something done to change the community by moving it in a more positive direction.
Mr. Thomas thanked Mr. Byndom and Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp for their eloquent comments, and for the incredibly difficult and important work they were doing since Sunday to maintain a respectful dialogue and manage a situation that could have gone in a different direction. He noted they had both influenced him personally in his understanding of race issues in Columbia and the United States. He asked them to continue doing the work they were doing, and to let him know what he could do to help. He explained they were specifically looking at the recommendations of the Task Force on Community Violence and would create an implementation checklist of those recommendations along with timelines, etc. He commented that he also appreciated the immediate comments of Mr. Matthes and supported those statements as well as him taking a step back in terms of the comment associated with not supporting additional funding for the police. He also thought they all deplored the original Facebook post.
Mayor McDavid stated he was fascinated by the cultural sensitivity seminar this community had recently undergone and the comments of people in the community to what he had found as offensive, insensitive, and divisive. He believed this incident had forced them to look into a mirror, and thought everyone should look in the mirror to include those that did not understand why this was an issue. He agreed with Mr. Ruffin in that this created a tremendous opportunity. In terms of the Columbia Police Department, he noted he had been the architect of the failed public safety ballot and had taken a lot of pride in stabilizing the pension plan. He stated he was absolutely committed to increasing public safety staffing. He noted, they had brave and disciplined men and women, who he was proud of in terms of what they did, and thought they needed more of them, but pointed out he believed those men and women needed better leadership. This was a sad circumstance, which he believed they would be better from by addressing it.
The meeting adjourned at 11:21 p.m. Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
26

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI NOVEMBER 2, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, November 2, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN and TRAPP were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meetings of October 5, 2015 and October 19, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Mr. Trapp.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Mayor McDavid asked that R175-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business per the request of staff.
The agenda, including the consent agenda with R175-15 being moved to new business, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Ms. Nauser.
SPECIAL ITEMS
None.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
None.
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Angela Speck - The total solar eclipse that will pass over Columbia on August 21, 2017 and planning for the tourist that will come to town as a result.
Ms. Speck provided a handout and explained there would be a total solar eclipse on August 21, 2017 in Columbia, Missouri. She noted the last time there had been a total solar eclipse on the continental United States was in 1979, the last one that had come across the continental United States was in 1918, and the last one to cross Missouri was more than two centuries ago. This would likely be the only chance for many people to view a total solar eclipse in their lifetime. She showed an animation of how it would travel over the United States and Missouri. The longest duration of the eclipse would be in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, at 2 minutes and 42 seconds of darkness, and Columbia, Missouri would be very close at 2 minutes and 36 seconds of darkness. She believed many people would come to Columbia to see the event, and the entire event of the moon staring to move to cover the sun until the moon then moved past the sun to the other side would take about two hours. Based on past travel due to eclipses and where people would likely travel, she thought 400,000 people
1

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
would visit Columbia. She was not sure the City was ready in terms of hotel rooms, traffic, emergencies, food, etc. She noted the eclipse would occur in the middle of the day and believed this could bring a lot of money into the City if handled correctly. She urged the Council to form a task force which included emergency services, the Chamber of Commerce, the Convention and Visitors Bureau, etc. so the City was ready for the event.
Lynn Maloney, Race Matters ­ Commending the creation of the Community Outreach Unit in relation to the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence.
Ms. Maloney stated she was with Race Matters and explained on October 23, the Police Department's outreach unit had described their work as re-doing the Department's community policing effort of the 1990's and their goals as being directed by the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She did not believe a unit whose mission was carried out by only two officers could meet those recommendations as they were department-wide initiatives, and included aggressively addressing the trust gap between the African-American community and police, moving toward a community policing model, cultural competency training for all officers, moving beyond responsive policing and positively engaging the community, attracting and training officers through professional development that rewarded the skills of relationship building, community involvement, and cultural competency, incentivizing officers to live in the neighborhoods where they served. She commented that community policing was a way of doing business by an entire police force, and not just a specialized unit of that force, and pointed out it was defined as a philosophy that promoted organizational strategies that supported the systematic use of partnerships and problem-solving techniques to proactively address the immediate conditions that give rise to public safety issues, such as crime, social disorder, and fear of crime. The Department of Justice's community-oriented police services indicated community policing was built on community partnerships, problem-solving, and organizational transformation. On August 20, the Columbia Police Department participated in a training that had focused on the need for procedural justice within a department before officers could be expected to engage procedural justice on the street. The focus of the training was on organizational leadership, building a mission and vision statement, and recruiting and training service-oriented officers. She stated organizational commitment was required for community policing to work. She commented that the officers of community outreach unit had shared they had been accused by other officers of being social workers with a gun, and that statement showed the Police Department had not yet fulfilled organizational transformation. She noted the community outreach unit was staffed by dedicated and hard-working officers, whose efforts were in alignment with the visions of the Task Force in terms of what was possible for the entire Police Department, but that unit was not equivalent to community policing or a satisfactory answer to the recommendations of the Task Force. She asked for fulfillment of the Task Force recommendations for community policing. She commented that without procedural justice, police intervention could easily devolve into racial profiling, excessive use of force, and other practices that would disregard civil rights and cause negative reactions from people living in already challenged communities. Community policing improved public safety and enhanced social connectivity and economic strength, which in turn increased community
2

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
resilience to crime. It also improved job satisfaction for officers. She stated Columbia deserved and needed best practices for policing.
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp ­ Community policing and outreach.
Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp explained she was with Race Matters and felt there was miscommunication with regard to community policing as she did not believe they all had the same definition or expectations. She thought they needed to come to a mutual agreement on how community policing was defined. She stated she viewed it as a philosophy in terms how people were treated. She understood police staffing was a part of it, and believed the police should be funded with a dedicated revenue stream similar to infrastructure. She commented that she was not satisfied with the document associated with the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence as it did not make sense to her. She understood the City had a document that told the public exactly how much was spent on social services, and thought it would be helpful to know how well the City was doing with policing in terms of the dollars spent along with the obstacles, challenges, etc. She noted there were issues of continuity and the fact minorities had the worst outcomes in all categories. She reiterated she believed there was miscommunication in terms of what they wanted with regard to community policing, and did not feel everyone needed was at the table for these conversations. She hoped everyone was included in future meetings, to include black churches, leaders, homeschool communicators, etc. She thought whoever was in charge of ensuring this transformation needed to circulate within the community as they could not expect those impacted by poverty or crime to always come to the City. She commented that she was interested in a review each agency in terms of challenges and barriers to success, and how each could get groups to interact more integrally with each other as there was a lot of redundancy and lack of communication. She believed this would assist in reducing violence issues in terms of children.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction of sanitary sewer improvements along Providence Road from 125 feet south of Stewart Road to Turner Avenue and along Turner Avenue to Fourth Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2.
Item A was read by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Trapp made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote.
(B) Construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle.
Item B was read by the Clerk.
3

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this would connect to other sidewalks. Mr. Nichols replied yes. Mr. Skala understood this had been on the capital improvement project list. Mr. Nichols replied it had been a part of the 2005 ballot issue. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, explained this was in her neighborhood and she was sure all of her neighbors were happy as they had wanted this for almost ten years. There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Ms. Nauser commented that this project showed City government did not work quickly. She noted this was City-owned property and believed the City needed to follow its own rules in terms of constructing sidewalks when property was developed. She was happy this would be finished within the next few months. Mr. Skala explained he had opposed the 2005 capital improvement ballot issue as an activist because he did not feel the right people had been included in discussing priorities, but noted he was happy some of the projects had been funded and would support this project. Mr. Thomas stated he supported this project and commented that the fact it took ten years suggested they had inadequate funding sources for sidewalks. Ms. Nauser made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the sidewalk and stormwater improvements on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
(C) Replacing existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting. B307-15 Authorizing the replacement of existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Item C was read by the Clerk, and B307-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser asked how long they expected to receive the savings and fort the life expectancy of LED lights. Mr. Griggs understood they would see a savings of $24,000 per year once all of the lights were replaced. Ms. Nauser asked when the lights would have to be replaced as she wanted to know the projected time frame for the savings. Mr. Griggs replied he did not know. Mr. Trapp asked about the natatorium. Mr. Griggs replied it was the pool, and the work for it would be contracted out because a specific lift was needed for those lights. Mr. Skala understood the lifespans of the LED lights was dependent on the number of times they were turned on and off. Mr. Griggs commented that many of the priorities were those lights that were left on all of the time. Mr. Thomas asked for the upfront installation cost of the LED lights. Mr. Griggs replied $89,000. Mr. Thomas understood the City would then save $24,000 per year so the payback time would be less than four years.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters understood the project was also eligible for $11,000 in rebates from the Water and Light Department's lighting incentive program and asked for clarification. Mr. Griggs replied they would apply for the rebates, and any money they received would be put toward enhancing the lighting replacement plan. Mr. Matthes explained this program would pay for part of the cost if specific products were purchased. Mr. Thomas understood it would be an internal transfer of funds. Mr. Matthes noted this was done for any customer.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Trapp stated he thought it was great they were using one-time funds for maximum benefit, but was concerned about investing in items with the highest rates of return in terms of energy-efficiency because it would almost guarantee they would not invest in the ones with longer rates of return. He thought a systematic process might be better, and suggested packaging energy-efficiency savings so the ones with a four year return could help defray the costs of the ones with longer rates of return. He explained he did not fault this process because it was an opportunistic move to take advantage of one-time funds in an effective way. He asked that staff put together packages of energy-efficiency projects with varying rates of paybacks so they could attain a greater overall energy-efficiency savings. Mr. Skala commented that he was not sure maximizing the benefit discouraged energy-efficiency because there was a commitment on behalf of the City to look at energy savings as a package. They were always concerned with balancing the budget, and one way was through finding efficiencies. He thought this project fit within that goal. Mayor McDavid commented that he believed citizens expected government to act in a fiscally frugal and responsible manner, and this investment, which would be paid back in less than four years, made sense. He did not, however, believe they needed to pat themselves on the back for it as he felt it was expected. He understood this would be eligible for $11,000 in rebates of taxpayer money that came from the water and light bills of customers of the utilities, and did not feel that was necessary. He did not believe they should take revenue from the most expensive utility in the State of Missouri to reduce the costs of this project even further. He noted this fed into his skepticism of the wide array of rebates and incentives offered by the Water and Light Department. He reiterated he did not feel it was necessary. He thought these programs needed to be reviewed at a higher level by the Water and Light Department, the Water and Light Advisory Board, and a future City Council. Mr. Thomas understood the purpose of the rebates was to encourage private and public customers of the utility to move to a more efficient mode of living and operating so less energy was used and the City, as a whole, did not have to spend money to import dirty energy from coal plants. The $11,000 was a part of a program designed to influence energy choices. He thought it was a valid use of ratepayer funds to create an efficient community. B307-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
5

OLD BUSINESS

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

PR136-15 Establishing a revised policy relating to the repair, maintenance and restoration of brick paved streets in the City of Columbia.

The policy resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas thanked the Council for supporting his motion to previously table this to allow the Disabilities Commission to review it. Mr. Skala commented that he had recently attended a successful festival in Fulton, Missouri, which was based around brick streets. He thought this was a measured attempt to preserve some history without going too far in terms of digging up and rebuilding streets. He appreciated the input of all that weighed in on it and thought it was something they should endorse. The vote on PR136-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Policy resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

B295-15 Amending Chapter 20 of the City Code as it relates to the schedule of fees for processing rezoning applications from any district to district R-1.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if staff would consider waiving fees when downzoning to R-2 in addition to R-1 as it was an interim step that would not require people to give up all of the value in their property and might encourage people to downzone to conform more to the community standard. Mr. Teddy replied he thought it would be up to Council to decide if they believed that type of zoning change to be worth the incentive. He noted any rezoning action had a $300 application fee and a $125 advertising fee. He suggested Council not waive the advertising fee because it was an outside cost and could become burdensome if a large volume of downzonings were received. Mr. Thomas asked how this ordinance related to elements of the Comprehensive Plan. Mr. Teddy replied it was viewed as something for neighborhood preservation as there could be areas or streets in the City where the zoning did not match the actual use or the actual potential of the property. He noted there could be lots that were too small or narrow to support a second dwelling unit, and a person downzoning would view it as preserving the character of the neighborhood. He stated it would not be a one size fits all situation as some street corners might support higher densities from a planning perspective. He pointed out there could be some financial impacts as four unrelated adults could reside on R-2 zoned property, while only three unrelated adults could reside on R-1 zoned property. Mr. Thomas commented that he was also interested in providing the option of waiving the fee for those downzoning from R-3 to R-2 or R-1. Mr. Thomas asked if properties that were commercially zoned would be eligible for the waiver of the fee if they downzoned to R-1. Mr. Teddy replied yes. He explained staff had discussed many options and had decided to propose something that was simple in structure for Council consideration. This would apply to any rezoning to R-1, which was the most
6

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
restrictive district. Mr. Thomas asked how he would feel about modifying the ordinance to make it applicable to only currently zoned residential properties. Mr. Teddy replied it was something they would need to review. He noted there could be commercially zoned properties that were used residentially.
Mr. Skala understood these would be reviewed on a case by case basis regardless of whether they were commercial or residential. Mr. Teddy stated the fee would not indicate whether they were in favor of any particular zoning change. Each rezoning would be evaluated on its own merits through the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council process. Mr. Thomas asked if the Planning and Zoning Commission would review whether to waive the fee on a case by case basis. Mr. Teddy replied no. The merits of the rezoning would be evaluated on a case by case basis.
Ms. Peters asked if this included agriculturally zoned land. Mr. Teddy replied yes, and explained the ordinance currently waived the fee for any change from A-1 to R-1.
Mr. Skala understood a rezoning from A-1 to R-1 was upzoning as it could be denser. Mr. Teddy stated that was dependent upon how it was viewed because agricultural zoning could include some commercial activity on a large enough site. A-1 uses tended to be benign within the City limits, but could include commercial activities related to agriculture.
Ms. Peters asked if it would be worth tabling a decision to allow time to review an R-3 to R-2 downzoning as well as the A-1 zoning. Mr. Teddy replied yes.
Mary Ratliff, 211 Park de Ville Drive, encouraged the Council to table this issue as this would affect people's property. She hoped they would take more time to review the issue before making a final decision, and did not know if two weeks would provide enough time for staff to research the issue.
Mark Farnen, 103 E. Brandon Road, commented that this bill was fairly innocuous on its face, but he believed the bill had the potential to do more. It would eliminate the application fee for downzoning requests and would allow those requests to be made at any time throughout the year. He understood staff had indicated this was in keeping with a policy established in 1993 that provided this type of relief as a protection for neighborhoods. He believed the relief and downzoning process in the original policy resolution had been intended to be used by a group of homes, and not single applicants, as it took a group of homes to make a neighborhood as opposed to a single property. The intent was to protect neighborhoods, and not to insulate an isolated piece. Language in this bill did not make that distinction and would allow for individual applications. The language in this bill also discussed the nullification of the earlier ordinance, which ensconced the idea of neighborhood protection. He commented that the problem with a single applicant approach was that it did not promote neighborhoods, and could be used to inhibit the fair use of nearby properties depending on what was done with the adoption of the new zoning code. He noted the new zoning code had some provisions in module 3 that allowed someone with an R-1 zoned property to make an objection against an R-3 zoned property, forcing the R-3 zoned property to reduce its footprint. This created an unfair advantage for the R-1 zoned property or at least nullified some of the available use of the R-3 zoned property. He understood the new code had not yet been adopted, but pointed out the purpose of the new code was to ensure all of the pieces fit together. He felt the passage of this bill tonight would highjack that
7

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
process and would potentially establish a rule that would artificially favor the rights of a single property owner over another property owner. He thought this should not be considered until the after the new zoning code was finalized so they knew the impact. He also believed it should be given more thought.
Mr. Skala stated he was not sure a mechanism existed for neighborhoods to make these decisions and thought it had to be done on a property by property basis. He agreed this needed to be more thoroughly reviewed. He understood Mr. Farnen wanted to ensure equity between property rights for the potential for developing property, the neighborhood, and individual properties. Mr. Farnen replied that was correct. He reiterated the draft zoning code suggested an R-1 zoned property had the ability to reduce the footprint of what was built on the R-3 zoned property by reducing the height, setbacks, etc., which provided an unfair advantage of the R-1 zoned property owner. It would not necessarily protect the neighborhood, and would protect or insulate a single property. He thought that was an injustice to the rights of the other property owner.
Dan Cullimore, 715 Lyon Street, encouraged the Council to table this issue. He appreciated the comments of Mr. Farnen although he did not necessarily agree with that position as he thought there was just as much of a chance for an R-3 zoned property to have detrimental consequences for an R-1 use. He commented that fundamentally, there was a real question with regard to what the highest and best use for a property was with the new development code. He wondered which property owner's highest and best use would take precedent.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, stated he believed this issue should be tabled to obtain more input. He commented that property north of Broadway had been blanket upzoned in 1969, and was certain the person that owned his house, which was built in 1913 as a single-family home, had not asked for it. He understood they might not have objected, but they had not asked for it. He felt there had been negative consequences to that decision as many homes had been divided into multiple apartments, and many homes were now gone because the City lacked code compliance enforcement. The rental code compliance ordinance had not been established until 1979. He believed the right to downzone at no cost or at a minimal $50 per parcel cost was a matter of equity. He commented that the use value of his home was his use. The comments of Mr. Farnen were biased toward the idea of an investor, which was a use value, but the use value to most people in his neighborhood was in living there. He suggested low fees for downzoning.
Mr. Skala asked if this issue had been referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration. Mr. Teddy replied no. He explained it was not part of the zoning chapter, but noted they could be consulted. Mr. Skala thought their input might be helpful in terms of downzoning, the necessity of an interim step, etc.
Mr. Skala made a motion to table B295-15 to the December 7, 2015 Council Meeting to allow time for staff and the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider the concerns and revisions suggested. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote.
8

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
B303-15 Appropriating funds for the Transit Service Analysis and Planning Assistance project.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if the scope of work included ancillary items related to transit, such as bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied the consultant would conduct a complete operational analysis of the system so they would look at everything. Mr. Thomas asked if a long term master plan and funding sustainability plan for the system would be developed by the consultant. Mr. Brooks replied yes. Mr. Thomas asked if the proposal by Olsson Associates was a public document that could be accessed and shared. Ms. Thompson replied it would be an open record after the contract was awarded, but not while it was in the negotiation process. Mr. Skala asked if it could be released to the City Council, and not publically released. Ms. Thompson replied she thought there might be a way for the Council to access it. Mr. Thomas stated he had seen it as staff had provided it to him and had told him it could not be provided to anyone else until a certain time. Mr. Skala stated he would like a copy. Ms. Peters asked what other cities had received services from this company. Mr. Brooks replied Lawrence, Kansas, Ames, Iowa, Manhattan, Kansas, etc. Ms. Peters understood they had worked with other college towns. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Ms. Peters asked when the report would be completed. Mr. Brooks replied it would take 14 months for all deliverables, but would be completed in phases. He thought the operational analysis would be completed in the first four months. Cheryl Price, 511 Parkade Boulevard, stated she was Chair of the Public Transit Advisory Commission (PTAC) and thanked Mr. Thomas for getting this project started and City staff for its work. She commented that she had been involved in the process from the beginning as a member of the selection committee and in reviewing the scope of work. She noted Olsson Associates had provided an excellent proposal as they would provide shortterm, mid-term, and long-term evaluations and funding sustainability recommendations. She pointed out other funding sources would be necessary if they wanted to enhance transit services. She stated the PTAC wanted to be involved with this process from the beginning to the end, and noted she was happy to see all of the proposals including the PTAC throughout the process. She thought Olsson Associates would do an excellent job. She explained the PTAC believed a true transit philosophy was need for Columbia, and that it should be built around social equity. She thanked the Council for its work and asked them to vote in favor of this appropriation. Mr. Thomas understood Olsson Associates had worked with Lawrence, Kansas, which he believed was an interesting model because they had expanded their transit system dramatically around 2008-2009 by simultaneously passing a City-wide sales tax to improve transit for the community and a student activity fee at the University of Kansas to improve student-oriented routes. He commented that it was hard to understand how great an amenity a good transit system, with buses every fifteen minutes to and from convenient locations, was when living in a town with a deeply underfunded public transit system. He stated they ended up spending a lot more money on building and maintaining roadways as a result. He
9

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
encouraged those traveling to other towns to view the transit systems in those communities. He noted communities were improving their transit systems, especially college towns, and Columbia needed to do this as well.
Mr. Skala if the University of Missouri was or would be involved in this process. Mr. Brooks replied yes. He noted they had been involved in the selection process and would be involved in the forthcoming process. Mr. Skala thought their involvement was absolutely critical. He noted the current transportation sales tax was split three ways between road repair, the airport, and transit, and all of these were essential needs. He believed it was essential to hire a consultant to help get a handle on transit needs so they could put something in place that would be effective.
B303-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B313-15 Amending Chapter 22 to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159 relating to residential refuse collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential refuse collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential roll cart refuse pick-up; to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159.1 relating to residential recycling collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential recycling collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential recycling roll cart pick-up. B315-15 Calling a special election to consider an initiative ordinance requiring the existing residential refuse and recycling collector and rate systems be maintained, prohibiting roll carts for residential refuse and recycling collection, and prohibiting the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential refuse and recycling roll cart pick-up.
The bills were given second reading by the Clerk. Ms. Thompson provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood this would prohibit not only the use of roll carts, but would also prohibit pay-as-you-throw using purely a bag system. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct. She noted if the Council adopted the ordinance or the voters approved the ordinance, the Council was prohibited from making alterations to the ordinance for six months unless it was done by the unanimous vote of the City Council. Ms. Peters asked how long this would be in effect if approved by the voters. She wondered if it was a permanent decision. Ms. Thompson replied the Council would not be able to make any alterations for six months. Mr. Skala asked if any alteration after six months would take a unanimous decision. Ms. Thompson replied no, and clarified a unanimous vote was required for any alteration within six months. Mr. Matthes pointed out the ordinance included the correct election date of March 15, 2016. The council memo had a typographical error of March 16, 2016. The ordinance as written had the correct date. Mr. Ruffin asked if roll carts would automatically be approved if this issue was defeated by the vote of the people. Ms. Thompson replied no. She explained Council would decide how to move forward in the future, and it could remain the status quo. Ms. Peters understood the Council could then do bags or roll carts. Mr. Skala understood it could be any option. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that he thought this was a waste of money in terms of the cost of the election, the cost of new trucks, and the cost for other changes. He noted the public had indicated it did not want roll carts. He suggested the health issue be considered in terms of mosquitos and the West Nile disease because of people not cleaning their roll carts.
Mary Ratliff, 211 Park de Ville Drive, asked the Council to vote in favor of the ordinance and to not send the issue to the voters. She noted her neighbor had a steep hill and she could not imagine her trying to get the roll cart up and down the hill in bad weather. She wondered where she would even store the roll carts at her home. She believed many older people would have issues with the roll carts and asked the Council to do what was right for the citizens. She noted the majority of the citizens she had talked with were not in favor of roll carts and did not feel the issue should go to the voters.
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, pointed out the City offered a program by which City employees would assist with taking the trash to the curb with certain documentation.
Joan Wilcox, 1000 Madison Street, commented that she lived in a rental and did not have any outdoor water so it would be difficult for her to clean her roll cart. She noted there was a lot to consider, particularly with older rental properties, the elderly, and hills.
Mr. Skala stated he was personally torn with regard to this decision as he saw the benefits of roll carts in terms of workers compensation and efficiencies of economies, but also saw the benefits of the current system and the drawbacks of roll carts in terms of storage and the cleaning of roll carts. He commented that he would prefer to not vote or to send this to the vote of the people, but noted he had to represent the Third Ward constituents, and at least two-thirds or three-quarters of the people at the informational sessions he had attended had indicated they were supportive of this ordinance. He stated he would vote for the ordinance, and hoped the Council would send the issue to the voters.
Mayor McDavid stated he had great faith in the citizens and would vote to send this issue to the voters in March.
Mr. Trapp commented that he was re-elected based on his support for roll cart choice. He stated he supported a hybrid system as he sympathized with those that had long gravel driveways, those with steep driveways, and those with storage issues in not wanting a roll cart, but noted he felt it was unfair to not allow him to have a roll cart. The compelling argument for him involved worker safety. There was a 45 percent annual turnover rate because people did not want to stay with the job since it was physically demanding and they were out in the elements. Weaving in and out of traffic was inherently dangerous and life threatening behavior. He pointed out the workers compensation claims had a human element of someone experiencing medical issues, and they, as representatives of City government, had a role to play for City staff in addition to constituents, as their lives were influenced and risks were taken due to policies that Council set. He stated those powers as a policymaker weighed heavily on him and he was not comfortable taking a show of hands from only those that attended a public meeting. Those that submitted the petition had an amazing amount of energy, enthusiasm, and organizing capacity, and based on the number of signatures, there was a significant portion of people that had issues with roll carts. He reiterated he had some sympathy and understanding for those not wanting a roll cart, but did
11

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
not believe it should prohibit him or others like him, who had concerns about worker safety, animals in the trash, etc., to not have roll carts. He understood some felt roll carts were ugly, but noted others felt trash bags were ugly, and believed the aesthetic argument paled in comparison to the safety of the work force. He pointed out the three online polls showed people were in favor of roll carts. In general, those opposed to something were more active and online poles were unscientific. He suggested they allow the citizens to vote on this issue as he did not believe Columbia was universally opposed to roll carts.
Mr. Thomas explained he spent a long Monday morning a couple of months ago with two solid waste collection teams in the East Campus area and in the Fourth Ward, and it was a physically demanding and dangerous job. Based upon that experience, he did not feel comfortable with restricting a technology that could improve the safety of workers. As a result, he stated he would not support the ordinance as written, and believed the vote of the people was the best way to proceed. He suggested a good education campaign between now and March so everyone voted with the full knowledge of all of the different aspects of this decision.
Ms. Nauser agreed that those attending the informational meeting were those that leaned toward not having roll carts. In her conversations with constituents, there were many people that were equally supportive of roll carts. She noted she was not necessarily against or in favor of roll carts, and believed they should look at the technology or consider a blended system. She pointed out she was, however, supportive of a pay-as-you-throw system, whether it was accomplished with bags or roll carts. She stated her 78 year old father, who had roll carts for trash and recycling, loved them, and pushed them up the incline of his driveway in Wentzville, Missouri where there was the same climatic experiences as there was in Columbia. She thought this issue should go to the vote of the people.
Mr. Ruffin stated he wished those in favor of roll carts were equally as passionate and organized as those who were against them. In speaking with individuals one on one, this was an issue that had divided the community. It was amazing to him that this was the hot topic currently. He thought it was appropriate to send this issue to the voters to make the decision. He noted he was concerned about technology, worker safety, etc. so he would vote against the ordinance as written and would vote in favor of sending it to the vote of the people. He pointed out allowing it to go the vote of the people would provide the opportunity to pursue a hybrid system or an alternative plan that was not as stringent as the ordinance as written.
B313-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA. VOTING NO: THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. Bill declared defeated.
B315-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.
12

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

B296-15
B297-15 B298-15 B299-15 B300-15 B302-15
B304-15
B305-15 B306-15 B308-15
B309-15 B310-15 B311-15 B312-15 R168-15

Approving the Final Plat of Barcus Ridge, Plat No. 2 located on the north side of Old Plank Road and southwest of the intersection of Route K and Old Plank Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations as it relates to direct driveway access on Old Plank Road subject to conditions.
Approving the Final Plat of Creeks Edge, Plat No. 3 located along Sawgrass Drive, west of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Vacating sewer and electric easements located on the northeast corner of Broadway and William Street (1601, 1605, 1701 and 1705 Broadway); accepting conveyances for sewer purposes.
Authorizing the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of an easement for the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63.
Authorizing a right of use permit with The Board of Trustees of Boone County Hospital to allow for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private irrigation system built in a portion of the Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard rights-of-way.
Authorizing an Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreement Partial Performance Acknowledgement of Hinkson Creek Physical Habitat Assessment with the County of Boone and The Curators of the University of Missouri as it relates to the collaborative adaptive management implementation (CAM) process to address the total maximum daily load (TMDL) for Hinkson Creek.
Vacating a portion of a water utility easement adjacent to Lot 2 and Lot 3 within Horse Fair Subdivision located on the north side of Oakland Gravel Road.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing a cooperative agreement with the Greenbelt Land Trust of Mid-Missouri for the FY 2016 implementation phase of the "Our Natural Legacy: A Plan for Columbia and Boone County" open space/green infrastructure project.
Authorizing an agreement with Green Valley Rifle & Pistol Club, Inc. for range facility access and use by the Columbia Police Department for official scheduled training.
Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for the Youth Leadership in Tobacco Prevention program; appropriating funds.
Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for HIV prevention; appropriating funds.
Authorizing Amendment No. 2 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Eating Active Living in Local Communities program; appropriating funds.
Setting a public hearing: replacement and upgrade of water mains along a portion of Sixth Street between Elm Street and Broadway, and transferring

13

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
all fire hydrants and customer services along a portion of Broadway between Fourth Street and Seventh Street.

R169-15

Setting a public hearing: renovation of the Lake of the Woods Clubhouse to include ADA upgrades and energy-efficient improvements.

R170-15

Setting a public hearing: construction of security upgrades to the Columbia Police Department building located at 600 E. Walnut Street.

R171-15

Authorizing agreements for FY 2016 Signature Series Funding under the Tourism Development Program; transferring tourism development funds to the Parks and Recreation Department for the Heritage Festival.

R172-15

Authorizing an agreement with Columbia Eve Fest, Inc. for support of the New Year's Eve event in downtown Columbia; authorizing the City Manager to provide City support services.

R173-15

Authorizing an educational affiliation agreement with Chamberlain College of Nursing, LLC to provide health clinical experience and instruction for nursing students.

R174-15

Authorizing a contract with the Central Missouri Humane Society for 2016 animal control and municipal shelter services.

R176-15 Adopting the Boone County Hazard Mitigation Plan.

R177-15

Authorizing the public sale of Special Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2015.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS
R175-15 Authorizing the purchase of equipment from Civic Recycling to be used by the Utilities Department ­ Solid Waste Division.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood this was recycled recycling equipment. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct. Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend R175-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote. Mr. Trapp commented that his employer had been a customer of civic recycling, and it was unfortunate to see them go out of business. He noted the City's solid waste division had been criticized for the rates charged, but this pointed to the difficulties in this industry and that government did have a role in solid waste. The private market struggled to do things that had more than a bottom line component even though he would argue recycling had a huge bottom line component by diverting items from the waste stream, which had a cost in itself and through resale values. Recycling also provided a social good. He was pleased the City was able to take the opportunity to get equipment at a good price and ensure the continuity of services of those with commercial contracts.

14

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala understood the industry was having great difficulty due to prices for recyclables being down, and asked how that had affected the City's system. He wondered if it had diminished the City's capacity to look toward the future to develop this as a resource. Ms. Mitchell replied it would become more expensive. It would cost more to process and there would be less revenue when sent elsewhere. She noted the market fluctuated and had been lower in 2008 at which point they were paying to get rid of recycling materials. It had not approached the 2008 level yet.
The vote on R175-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R178-15 Approving the Preliminary Plat of Bear Creek Vistas located on the east side of Creasy Spring Road and north of Prairie Lane (3628 N. Creasy Springs Road).
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser understood the new proposed road would connect to another subdivision, and asked when that subdivision would be built. Mr. Teddy replied it would depend on how fast the lots sold and other financial factors. Ms. Nauser commented that Creasy Springs Road was not on the next 10-year capital improvement project list, and she envisioned an increase in traffic on that road due to the new connection. She asked if this had been discussed as she did not believe they wanted additional traffic on Creasy Springs Road and was concerned with approving this preliminary plat for that reason. She asked if anything would be done to keep traffic away from Creasy Springs Road. Mr. Teddy replied the Major Roadway Plan called for Blue Ridge Road to extend all of the way to Creasy Springs Road, north of the curve, so that connection would be made. This would be built as a local residential street. Staff could take a closer look and forecast trips if the connection was fully made at both ends. Ms. Nauser stated she did not envision anyone taking a right out of the new subdivision and thought people would likely take the new connection to Creasy Springs Road, which would put traffic right at the curve. She did not think she could support more traffic to Creasy Springs Road until the road was straightened, and approval of the preliminary plat would obligate them to approve the final plat. Mr. Teddy noted an option would be to grant a variance to allow a private driveway access. He thought staff likely considered this, but felt it would not be keeping with the ordinance as it could create a lost opportunity for the connection through the neighborhood since there would be a long interval between Prairie Lane and the Blue Ridge Road extension. Mr. Trapp asked if Salamander Lane could connect to Blue Ridge Road if it was extended and if Creasy Springs Road had not yet been realigned. Mr. Teddy replied another possibility was for it to terminate on the south end either permanently of on a temporary basis, depending on how the overall roadway plan shaped up. He noted there was a lot in play. They could look at existing conditions only as current conditions would call for a street that only connected to Creasy Springs Road since the Blue Ridge Road extension was not yet complete or for a cul-de-sac.
15

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala stated he was uncomfortable with this preliminary plat as well as the curve was dangerous, and understood there might be other options to make different connections to avoid placing more traffic on to Creasy Springs Road until it was made to be safer.
Mayor McDavid asked how many homes would be in this subdivision. Mr. Teddy replied three. One already existed and two would be constructed. Mayor McDavid understood the traffic count on Creasy Springs Road was 2,500 vehicles per day. Mr. Teddy stated he was not certain, but thought that was close as it was a low volume road.
Ms. Nauser asked if they knew what the traffic count would increase to if Blue Ridge Road was extended and this new street was constructed as she was more concerned about the future than today. Mr. Teddy replied no.
Ron Lueck, 914 N. College Avenue, stated he was with Lueck Surveying and explained he had prepared the preliminary plat and the final plat at the direction of City staff. J.D. Kelly had purchased the lot in 2010, and at the time, it had a house, a shack, a mobile home, and junk cars. He noted Mr. Kelly had cleaned up the lot by removing the shack and mobile home, and rehabilitating the house with a desire to recoup his investment by selling the house. In August, they had tried to do a tract split to sell only the house, but that was not satisfactory to City staff. They then moved in the direction of this preliminary plat. He pointed out a 2006 plan showed Creasy Springs Road as a cul-de-sac at some point. A 2007 plan showed the road going through a duplex structure on the corner of Creasy Springs Road, which they then tried but City staff did not like it. They then reverted to this layout, which by default would create two other lots the owner had no intention of developing at this time since the construction of the road was cost prohibitive for only two lots. He reiterated the owner was only trying to sell the one acre lot with the house, which had frontage on Creasy Springs Road with a driveway. He explained that when this property came into the City a year after it was purchased, it had three driveways and three newly installed 40-foot long culverts. The northern driveway was not safe so they would have a triangular easement to use the middle drive to get to this particular piece of property. He noted Salamander Lane would be a part of the entire Creasy Springs Road relocation project. It would not stand on its own. The Blue Ridge Road extension and Creasy Springs Road relocation projects would have to take place before Salamander Lane was constructed.
Mr. Trapp commented that there were a lot of moving pieces, and approving this would honor the facts on the ground. This person had purchased a property with a lot of negatives and had taken steps to clean up the area and eliminate two of the three driveways. The property owner had hoped for a simpler process, but City staff had taken a broader view on the situation. City staff was not only looking at the current facts as they were looking at interconnectivity for the future as well. He noted he did not believe the Willow Falls subdivision would move quickly. The City had raised the cost of what it took to build a house, and there was a threshold for what people would pay for a house north of I-70 due to crime perceptions, and development had slowed down in the Second Ward, which had created a situation where plans were not moving forward in a timely manner. It was a cautionary tale of the limits of long-range planning. He stated he would hate to see this voted down since the property owner only wanted to divide the lot and City staff only wanted to protect the long term interests of the City in terms of neighborhood connectivity. He agreed they did not want
16

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
to dump more cars on to Creasy Springs Road, and noted the extension of Blue Ridge Road was not dependent on this project. He stated he did not believe they would get a lot of people from Salamander Lane even if Blue Ridge Road was extended and the two lots were developed as there were better sight lines elsewhere. He thought they had discretion with regard to granting the access based upon sight lines and traffic engineering studies when it came down to the final plat. He commented that this was a complex issue, and encouraged the Council to approve this preliminary plat as it did justice for the current property owner, recognized the immediate interests, and aligned with the comprehensive plan to ensure connectivity in the future.
Mr. Skala stated this was a problem area due to the curve on Creasy Springs Road, which needed to be addressed, but noted he was inclined to defer to Mr. Trapp, especially in light of the property owner trying to do the right thing, as it was hard to hold someone hostage that was doing the right thing. He took a bit of umbrage with the idea of development slowing down north of I-70 as it was still going strong in northeast Columbia. He suggested they move up the realignment of Creasy Springs Road in the CIP Plan in the future, if necessary, as it was a dangerous road.
Mayor McDavid noted he was convinced by Mr. Trapp's analysis on this issue. He pointed out the Council had asked for traffic calming, signage, etc. with regard to Creasy Springs Road and expected that to be forthcoming in a report. He believed there were ways to address the issues temporarily at a fairly low cost.
Ms. Nauser stated he appreciated Mr. Trapp's explanation with regard to this issue and noted she would defer to his him as well. She hoped the City would look at this area more closely in terms of the next capital improvement ballot initiative. She commented that she had dealt with the traffic and safety issues on Forum Boulevard where Wilson's Total Fitness was located, and it had been a situation of unintended consequences due to previous platting and zoning decisions. She hoped they would heed what they had learned in terms of Forum Boulevard and move more quickly on this area of the community in terms of safety and connectivity. She stated she would support this even though she had concerns.
The vote on R178-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING
The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

B316-15 B317-15 B318-15

Authorizing the issuance of Special Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2015.
Rezoning property located on the northeast corner of John Garry Drive and North Cedar Lake Drive (4804 John Garry Drive) from Districts O-1 and C-1 to District R-3.
Rezoning property located on the west side of Rangeline Street, between Business Loop 70 and Interstate 70 (1413 Rangeline Street), from District C-3 to District M-1.

17

B319-15

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Authorizing construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B320-15

Authorizing construction of the Upper Hinkson Creek Outfall Sewer Extension Phase I Project located along Hinkson Creek from just south of Vandiver Drive to near the northern boundary of the City of Columbia landfill; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B321-15

Authorizing the replacement and upgrade of water mains along a portion of Sixth Street between Elm Street and Broadway, and transferring all fire hydrants and customer services along a portion of Broadway between Fourth Street and Seventh Street; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B322-15 Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.

B323-15

Authorizing the renovation of the Lake of the Woods Clubhouse to include ADA upgrades and energy-efficient improvements; calling for bids for a portion of the project through the Purchasing Division.

B324-15

Authorizing a memorandum of understanding with Columbia Public Schools for the Healthy Eating and Active Living (HEAL) program.

B325-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for maternal child health services.

B326-15

Appropriating asset forfeiture funds for an additional staffing optimization study in the Columbia Police Department for the Investigative Division.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP105-15 Future Use of Red Light Cameras.

Mr. St. Romaine provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked how many of the accidents from the local data were due to rear end accidents and how many involved fatalities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he did not have that information. Mr. Skala asked if there had been any fatalities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he thought there might have been one fatality. Mr. Skala asked if that was due to running a red light. Mr. St. Romaine replied yes. Mr. Skala asked if that had been recorded on camera. Mr. St. Romaine replied he would need to ensure the fatality was at a red light camera intersection. Mr. Trapp asked for the dates of the City's red light camera program. Mr. St. Romaine replied September 2009 to November 2013. Mayor McDavid understood there had been a decline in accidents after they had stopped the red light camera program. Mr. St. Romaine stated he was not sure everyone in Columbia knew the red light camera program had ended. He thought there had likely been a spillover effect. Mr. Skala stated he thought one camera that was rotated throughout the City might have the same effect. Mr. Thomas noted that was actually done in the United Kingdom in terms of speed cameras. Non-descript gray boxes were placed in many locations whereby

18

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
people could not tell if it included a camera, and the cameras were moved around. He thought it had been a very effective program.
Ms. Nauser understood the fine for running a red light was $120. Mr. St. Romaine stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser thought they should increase fines in order to change behavior, and asked if that had been considered in order to deter bad behavior. She did not feel $120 was enough considering the potential gravity of killing someone by running a red light. Mr. Thomas felt the issue was that it was difficult to catch people that were running the red lights without the cameras. Ms. Nauser understood the rates of people running red lights had decreased because people thought the program still existed, and believed that it would have the same psychological impact if they thought they would get a severe ticket or fine. Mr. Skala suggested they consider larger signs indicating fines would double at monitored intersections. Mr. St. Romaine stated that could be done, but the difficulty was in capturing a violation. They would not want an enforcement officer at the intersection. He explained they knew the bad behavior was occurring and were using technology to help with enforcement. He noted he did not believe red light cameras would cure the situation and agreed there were other ways to curb bad behavior. He thought the Council could raise fines and use red light cameras to capture violations as it would be double deterrent.
Mr. Thomas understood the difference was 1,700 versus 300 in terms of people caught by camera versus a police officer. Mr. St. Romaine noted that was City-wide. Mr. Thomas understood only a small number of violators would be captured with police officers. Mr. St. Romaine explained that was because they would have to be at the right place at the right time, and would have to safely make it through the intersection.
Ms. Nauser asked why they needed to catch anyone if the goal was to deter bad behavior, and noted that made it seem as if this was only being done to generate revenue. Mr. St. Romaine commented that he was not saying no community in the United States was using red light cameras as a revenue producer, but it had not been a money maker in Columbia. From fiscal year 2009 through 2014, the gross red light camera revenue received had been $447,000 at $120 per citation. Payments to Gatso during that same time period totaled $210,000, leaving a net to the City of $237,000. He noted Gatso had conducted all of the intersection surveys, installed all of the conduits at the intersections, installed, operated and maintained the camera systems, and employed people to look at every violation to ensure it was a true violation, which had cost more than $210,000. They had likely lost over $500,000 in Columbia. The cost to Columbia to install its own cameras would be about $735,000.
Mr. Thomas asked how the Gatso business model worked for them. Mr. St. Romaine replied it did not work very well for them in Columbia. Mr. Thomas asked what was different in other cities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he thought it had to do with the community's willingness to install red light cameras. Columbia's contract with Gatso called for the installation of cameras at 16 intersections, but only five were installed once the initial 23 surveys had been completed. Gatso had constantly been suggesting additional surveys. Mr. Thomas understood they had hoped the City would add cameras over time as it would pay for itself once they had enough cameras installed.
19

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Matthes noted many states treated this more like a parking violation than a points on your license situation in that a person was ticketed if anyone drove that person's vehicle through a red light. Mr. Thomas understood Columbia had done that for a while. Mr. Matthes replied it was only done for a short while. Mr. St. Romaine noted the City had lost close to $220,000 per year by trying to ensure the driver owned the vehicle. He pointed out the City had operated under the principle that the driver was the one that was liable for the first four years of the program. They had only ticketed the vehicle owner from August to November of 2013 based on a court case. Mr. Matthes thought 80 percent of the violations caught on camera were never processed because the photograph of the driver did not match the photograph of the owner of the vehicle due to quality or another reason.
Mr. Skala understood paint could be placed on a license plate to obscure the reflection from the flash of the camera without obscuring the license plate by the normal eye. Mr. St. Romaine stated that was correct as it had been tested on the television show, Mythbusters, and appeared to work.
Mr. Thomas understood they could not issue the ticket to the person issued the license plate due to state law. Mr. St. Romaine clarified the license plate and driver had to be captured to try to match them up in order to issue the citation.
Mayor McDavid commented that this was all about public safety for him. He thought the Council was obligated if it added to public safety convincingly, but the data did not support it in this situation. They could speculate on the reason for the decline in intersection accidents after the cameras were removed, but the decline had occurred after the cameras were removed. He suggested they keep this option available for the future in case traffic patterns changed and collisions increased. He believed there was enough resistance community-wide that he needed more compelling evidence of the enhancement to public safety by red light cameras.
Ms. Nauser stated she concurred with Mayor McDavid. She explained she had previously voted against red light cameras and would likely do so again for varying reasons, but did not think they should disregard the use of other solutions to address the issue. She had received an e-mail from a constituent suggesting the review of perception and reaction times for traffic lights. She understood poorly painted street lines also contributed to the problem, and that was an issue at night, especially when it was raining. She thought these items should be reviewed at the problem intersections. She noted other suggestions were larger lenses on the lights or plates on the back to prevent glare. She reiterated she thought these low cost items should be considered first.
Mr. Skala commented that he also agreed with Mayor McDavid. He noted he had previously voted against the cameras as well, and stated he might be willing to change his mind if there was compelling evidence because he believed public safety was paramount. He agreed there were likely other ways to deal with this issue, to include signage. He understood there could be hugely disastrous outcomes from running red lights, but thought many accidents at intersections involved rear end collisions which did not necessarily involve fatalities. He did not believe it was worth an investment in cameras when there were other ways to resolve the issue. He thought a police officer could monitor intersections on an
20

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
occasional and random basis as he understood the City did not have the staffing to do this on a regular basis.
Mr. Thomas commented that 40,000-50,000 people were killed on the roads in the United States every year, and more than one million people were injured in these types of crashes. He felt they had become immunized from these crashes along with the associated devastating injuries and fatalities. He noted there was a rapidly growing movement called Vision Zero, which did not accept the idea of people having to die or be maimed on roadways. Their strategies, which included slowing down traffic and enforcing the law consistently and effectively, had resulted in dramatic reductions in death and injury for motorist, pedestrians, and cyclists in New York. He believed the data in Columbia was compelling and was surprised by the opposition as he did not see the downside to cameras. He understood some had indicated there were low cost alternate solutions, but noted he did not feel there were any costs to the red light cameras based on the structure of the contract. He commented that he was not enthusiastic about a third party company making a business out of an enforcement activity, but the City would have to find $700,000 to launch a similar program. He believed it would be a net benefit to the community to improve enforcement.
Mr. Thomas made a motion directing staff to move forward with legislation amending Chapter 14 of the City Code relating to automatic traffic control systems, red light cameras, in compliance with the recent Supreme Court ruling, and authorizing the City Manager to initiate a request for proposals process for the installation, operation, and administration of a red light system. The motion died for the lack of a second.
Mr. Trapp stated the inability of enforcement due to police staffing issues was the strongest argument of staff as the local safety data showed a decline after the cameras were removed. He agreed with Mayor McDavid in that the data should be monitored for changes. He noted he believed Columbia had acted with honor with regard to red light cameras, but did not feel they should move forward with the camera unless they saw safety data in support of it.
Mr. Skala suggested signs at intersections indicating the dangers at the intersection and reminding people to pay attention to the lights at intersections. Mr. St. Romaine noted they would have to work with MoDOT as every questionable intersection was a MoDOT intersection. Mr. Skala suggested they ask MoDOT as he believed there was power in warning people.
REP106-15 Administrative Public Improvement Project: Rock Quarry Park Improvements.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP107-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that solid waste positions provided low skill employment opportunities, and was concerned about jobs lost due to machines.
21

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Elkin noted a gentleman had fallen off a roof at Old Hawthorne and might never walk again. He thought they needed to consider the accident rate in building larger homes and suggested promoting the building of smaller, green homes.
Greg Ahrens, 1504 Sylvan Lane, explained he had tried to watch recent council meetings live online, and was not sure of the issue except that he moved to Windows 10. He wondered if Silverlight was not compatible with Windows 10. He noted he was able to watch past meetings, but not the live feed. He asked if the City could look into the issue. He also suggested streaming the council meetings on Ustream, Livestream, or something similar for those that did not have cable.
Mr. Ahrens noted fences had been built along the sidewalks on the actual bridge over the Hinkson Creek at Stephens Lake Park, but not at the approaches on both sides, which had steep drop-offs whereby a person in a wheelchair or on a bicycle could fall. He asked if fences could be installed at the approaches as well.
Mr. Thomas thought the City should explore the impact of the total solar eclipse in terms of law enforcement, traffic, and tourism, and suggested the Convention and Visitors Bureau meet with Ms. Speck and make recommendations to the Council on the need for a task force, etc. Mr. Matthes noted the Convention and Visitors Bureau had already met with Ms. Speck. He thought the goal tonight was to ensure everyone was aware of the eclipse.
Mr. Thomas noted the Council had received a letter from the Youth Advisory Council in terms of alternatives to arrests in the juvenile justice system and had recommended a "Wake Up" campaign, which was an implicit bias education campaign, peer courts within schools, encouraging counselors to understand the home backgrounds of students getting into trouble, etc. He thought it was a very good report.
Mr. Skala stated some of them were leaving for the National League of Cities meetings on Wednesday. He noted these were phenomenal meetings and provided a way to connect with other cities to find solutions, etc. He pointed out he would receive a Diamond Certification at the conference on Thursday afternoon, and that anyone wanting to contact him could send an e-mail.
Mr. Trapp commented that he had been contacted by Carrie Gartner regarding the hanging of banners in the Business Loop Community Improvement District (CID) as it would help Mizzou North and the Museum of Art and Archeology. He understood there were actions needed by the Water and Light Department and an ordinance process, and asked staff to move the ordinance along to allow banners in the Business Loop CID.
Mr. Trapp asked citizens to vote to support the City's wonderful parks tomorrow as it was the only way they would be able to add significant new green space, which he believed was the single-most investment a growing community could make. He pointed out projects were spread throughout the City in a really fair and comprehensive way as well.
The meeting adjourned at 10:06 p.m.
22

Respectfully submitted,

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

Sheela Amin City Clerk

23

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI OCTOBER 5, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, October 5, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS and MCDAVID were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
Mayor McDavid explained the minutes of the regular meeting of September 21, 2015 were not yet complete.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Ms. Peters asked that R156-15 and R162-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business.
Mr. Thomas asked that R159-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business. Ms. Nauser asked that R157-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business. Upon her request, Mr. Skala made a motion to allow Ms. Nauser to abstain from voting on R162-15 due to a conflict of interest. Ms. Nauser noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that her family business was involved in alcohol sales. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote. Ms. Peters made a motion to remove R163-15 from the agenda per the request of staff. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. The agenda, including the consent agenda with R156-15, R157-15, R159-15, and R162-15 being moved to new business, and R163-15 being removed from the agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Mr. Thomas.
SPECIAL ITEMS
Swearing in of John Glascock as the Deputy City Manager of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Glascock to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Glascock as Deputy City Manager.
Swearing in of Tad Johnsen as the Director of Utilities of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Johnsen to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Johnsen as Director of Utilities.
1

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Swearing in of Dave Nichols as the Director of Public Works of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Nichols to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Nichols as Director of Public Works.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Mayor McDavid appointed Amy Wasowicz to the Mayor's Task Force on Pedestrian Safety, and explained she was replacing Syed Ejaz.
MAYOR'S TASK FORCE ON PEDESTRIAN SAFETY Amy Wasowicz, 1300 Rollins Street, #4160, Ward 6
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp - Discussion of diversity, inclusion, and human capacity.
Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, questioned how many worlds one could walk in besides one's own with grace, and noted she was black, spoke Spanish, and could walk in a few worlds beyond her own and likely fake it in four or five others because she was comfortable outside of her comfort zone. She believed bad outcomes were a result of people not being able to get out of their comfort zones, and provided achievement gap, mass incarceration, health disparities, etc. as outcome examples. She quoted former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall as saying "Obviously I too believe in a colorblind society but it has been and remains an aspiration. It is a goal to which our society has progressed, uncertainly, bearing as it does the enormous burdens of incalculable injuries inflicted by race, prejudice and other bigotries which the law once sanctioned and even encouraged. Not having attained our goal, we must face the simple fact there were groups in every community which were daily paying the cost of American in justice." She commented that it was important to not have a clutch response of "what about black on black crime" when talking about police and crime, and felt they needed to be able to move beyond those comments. She also felt they needed to think about how they engaged conversation. Her formula was collaboration plus inclusion plus capacity would equal diversity. They had to re-engineer what they thought of diversity. She explained they were willing to learn new technology regularly and had to treat diversity in the same manner. It was not static and always changed so they had to relentlessly be willing to keep learning. She stated collaboration was not a checklist, different strategies were needed for every situation, and the impact of the strategies needed to not do any harm. It required a lifelong approach, flexibility, and the willingness for people to look at their own personal toolbox to determine what was missing. Inclusion involved having all of the right people at the table, not operating in a silo, thinking outside of the box, a desire for all of the facts, etc. She commented that being able to walk into other worlds provided the opportunity to gain outside experiences. She stated intellectual and human capital provided the capacity to solve problems. There was not a single application, and it would require multiple approaches at the same time. She asked if that could be done as a community. She thought it was important for people to not feel they could use the N-
2

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
word or make any kind of comment about anyone, and for people to have the skills to say they would not accept those remarks any more. She quoted Thomas C. Holt of saying "Like many others who had gone before you, you must struggle against injustice with all your might. You must refuse to be racialized or to racialize others, but at the same time you must live as if the world was otherwise. You must reach out and claim it as your own. I know that is a lot to ask. It will certainly require a difficult heroism and subtle resistance as well as exposure to the risk of being misunderstood by your peers and elders, but perhaps, just perhaps, when enough people do as you do, racism will indeed have no future." She commented that the challenge was how many worlds one could walk in and could they lead others to do the same with grace.
Julie Ladehoff - Community policing and issues of racial justice in Columbia.
Ms. Ladehoff, 1025 Lakeside Drive, stated she was representing Race Matters and commented that she had chosen the creation of a curriculum for a sixteen week college course on the topic of white privilege as it related to modern racism for her capstone project for her degree from the University of Missouri. During her work on the course, she read scholar after scholar, who asserted that most European-American whites were unaware of their privileged status in a society where white supremacy and institutionalized racism were the norm. In numerous disciplines, including social work, psychology, education, political science, and business, the message proclaiming the need for whites to examine their own racial privilege was being affirmed. The reason modern racism was invisible to most whites was because it resided mostly in systems instead of acts of personal prejudice. This modern form of racism, which followed the heels of Jim Crow, was often defined or called colorblind racism as most whites felt they were non-racist while benefitting from privileges or lacking disadvantages on a daily basis and in significant areas of their lives, simply based on skin color. She agreed it was difficult to separate out class dynamics from race dynamics, but noted many scholars agreed race alone, separate from the element of social class, afforded whites privileges in the areas of housing, education, healthcare, employment, etc. One element of society where modern racism played out with devastating consequences for people of color was the criminal justice system. On August 20, 2015, the Columbia Police Department had participated in a course called Procedural Justice for Law Enforcement Agencies ­ Organizational Change through the Integration of Procedural Justice Core Principles in Decision-Making and Policies created under the auspicious of the Department of Justice. The stated purpose of the course was to assist in the organizational transformation of a response-oriented police service to one based on policies that supported community policing. This transformation to a community policing model rather than a response-oriented model was one of the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She commented that trust, transparency, and community involvement were emphasized in the report as values to espouse in reducing violence. She urged the Police Department to make the transition from a service focused on responding to calls to a service that was proactive and focused on crime prevention. She noted Race Matters had great confidence in the ability of the Police Department to make the change. In order to fulfill the potential of the Police Department's new commitment, as stated in the citizens handbook, on problem-
3

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
oriented policing and community policing, Race Matters was asking the Council to support this new level of engagement in ways detailed by the current policy literature on community policy by hosting a forum for the Police Department to outline this new model of policing, inviting the Police Department to describe the problem-oriented policing projects they had developed, and asking the Police Department to inform those living in the highest crime areas to work with them in creating solutions that would address crime in their neighborhoods. As a lifelong resident of Columbia, she was grateful for the abundant strengths of the community and asked community leaders to take bold actions in leading Columbia toward greater justice for all of its citizens.
Mary Hussmann - Red light cameras.
Ms. Hussmann, 210 Ridgeway Avenue, commented that Gatso, the company the City entered into a five-year deal with in 2009, had talked communities into installing red light cameras by claiming they would improve safety. She thought most Missourians felt red light cameras were primarily used to generate revenue instead of improving safety. For each $120 ticket, Columbia received $76 and Gatso received $44. Initially, the cameras took pictures of the front plate and the driver, and a ticket was mailed to the alleged if police officers were able to match the face to the owner's driver's license. She believed comparing photos for fines was a poor use of the professional experience and time of officers, and noted an officer out on the street ticketing a driver for running a red light would not have this identification problem. In August 2013, staff reported officers were not able to consistently make matches, and thus, the City was losing about $200,000. At the urging of staff, the Council agreed to only ticket the title owner. She pointed out the report provided to Council did not focus on safety improvements. It was all about money. She noted the Missouri Supreme Court declared this method to be unconstitutional and mandated that points be applied against the violator's driver's license. St. Louis, Kansas City, and other Missouri communities were refunding money to car owners illegally ticketed by title only. She wondered how much money Columbia illegally generated and whether the City would refund those illegally charged. She commented that people could now buy a product that could be sprayed on a license plate to block it from a radar or enforcement camera. She suggested Columbia move away from this punitive system and recommended free drivers education classes instead. She also suggested the Council wait to proceed with red light cameras again until the next Missouri legislative session ended as bills would again be filed to restrict red light cameras as she was concerned about the repercussions of another five-year Gatso contract if a restriction was passed by the legislators. She asked the Council to vote against red light cameras.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive.
B280-15 Authorizing the construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive; determining that the work shall be done by City employees.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Item A was read by the Clerk, and B280-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if these mains had been installed prior to annexation into the City. Mr. Johnsen replied he did not believe this area had been annexed into the City. He thought this area was just outside the City limits. He explained payment was a little higher when the utility acquired water district pipes just outside of the City, and believed these had a 15 percent higher water rate. Mayor McDavid understood historically there had been an issue of lower standards outside of the City limits and asked if that had been rectified. He wondered if infrastructure construction outside of the City limits conformed to what was required by the City of Columbia. He did not believe they wanted to take over substandard infrastructure as citizens of Columbia would then have to pay to upgrade it. Mr. Johnsen explained there were differences between rural water districts and metropolitan water utilities, and the primary difference involved fire protection, which was being resolved in this situation. He pointed out they were not transferring any potable water. It was essentially a fire protection project. He noted that as the old water lines wore out, these properties would be transferred to the new lines, but that it was not currently part of this project. Ms. Peters understood the City did not have to upgrade these new lines. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct in terms of the potable water supply, but noted the upgrade was needed for fire protection. He explained eight- and six-inch lines were needed for fire protection. Ms. Peters understood that when the potable water lines became old, the City could just transfer the water utilizing these new lines. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct. He explained the ones the City was installing now were by the street and the existing lines were in the back yards of properties, so they would not have to dig up backyard to replace those. Mr. Thomas understood these customers paid 15 percent higher rates. Mr. Johnsen stated this was typical for customers that were outside of City limits and previously water district customers. The agreement authorized a shade more than 15 percent in this situation. Mr. Thomas asked if this would continue forever. Mr. Johnsen replied he thought it would continue until the property was annexed into the City. Mr. Skala noted this area was contiguous to the City limits and was in the area slated to be annexed due to Battle High School. He thought this project was essential in terms of firefighting capacity and public safety. Mr. Johnsen explained the City's service territory went toward Lake of the Woods Golf Course and north. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Thomas believed this was similar to new developments in many ways, whereby the City would want to apply a connection fee. He understood the City was investing $300,000 to bring water service up to City standards, but the fact they were paying a higher rate mitigated this to some extent. He noted this was an expense the City would not have if they had not added these customers to the municipal water service. Mr. Skala commented that although he agreed with that concept in terms of new capacity, this was an established area. In addition, the City did not have connection fees in
5

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
place for this enhanced safety factor. He agreed with Mr. Thomas philosophically, but did not feel they could lay that type of burden on the people in this area.
B280-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
OLD BUSINESS
B245-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to revise the speed limit on portions of Providence Road and State Route K.
The bill was given third reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood the speed limit was 45 mph east of Coneflower Avenue and 55 mph west of Coneflower Avenue to Scott Boulevard. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas understood the proposal was to reduce the speed limit to 45 mph from Coneflower Avenue west to Scott Boulevard, and asked for the speed limit east from Coneflower Avenue to Providence Road. Mr. Nichols replied that speed limit was 55 mph. Mr. Thomas asked why the entire section was not being reduced as there was more residential development in that section. Mr. Stone replied the MoDOT study indicated speeds were higher in that section and was mainly concerned about the section from Coneflower Avenue to Providence Road due to the number of curves and collisions. Mr. Thomas asked how he would characterize the impact of changing the speed limit on drivers in terms of the speeds driven. Mr. Stone replied the operating speeds of traffic right now were close to the speed limit suggestion of MoDOT. Mr. Thomas commented that the diagram indicated the speed limit was already 45 mph from Coneflower Avenue to the east. Mr. Stone stated he thought that was the proposed speed. Mr. Thomas thought the change would be west of Coneflower Avenue. Ms. Nauser understood the change was from Scott Boulevard to Coneflower Avenue. Mr. Stone stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas understood the speed limit there was 45 mph and achieving 47 and 46 mph, and they would change the section west to Scott Boulevard from 55 mph to 45 mph in hopes to bring down the 50 and 52 mph to closer to 45 mph. Mr. Skala thought they needed to be consistent, and if they had a lower speed limit on the section to the east, this speed limit should be consistent with the speed limit on the west. He believed that would optimize the result they were trying to achieve. Mr. Thomas asked if the characteristic of the road had changed. Ms. Nauser replied there was more development along Route K. Mr. Skala felt that made the argument to reduce the speed limit even more compelling. Ms. Nauser stated it would be more consistent with City ordinances on speeds. Mr. Stone explained MoDOT set the speed limit and the City's ordinances reflected that speed limit. Ms. Nauser stated she was concerned by the speed limit remaining at 55 mph before Scott Boulevard. She questioned whether people would reduce their speeds, and asked who had requested this change. Mr. Stone replied MoDOT had reviewed it as part of their periodic reviews of roadways.
6

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala asked if it worth asking MoDOT to consider the piece that connected with Scott Boulevard so it was entirely consistent. Mr. Stone replied they could ask MoDOT. Ms. Nauser stated she would support talking to MoDOT so the entire section from McBaine on through was reduced due to some of the site lines at the intersection with Route KK. Mr. Stone noted staff would contact the MoDOT engineer regarding their request.
The vote on B245-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B273-15 B274-15 B275-15 B276-15
B277-15 B278-15
B279-15 R153-15
R154-15
R155-15 R158-15 R160-15

Amending Chapter 29 of the City Code as it relates to pet stores, grooming or small animal care establishments.
Approving the C-P Plan for First Midwest Bank ­ Red Oak South located on the southeast corner of Grindstone Parkway and Norfleet Drive.
Approving a major revision to the C-P Development Plan for Lot 2 ­ Katy Place Heights located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Forum Katy Parkway (1410 Forum Katy Parkway).
Authorizing the release of access easements on Lot 303 within Berlekamp Subdivision Plat 3 located on the west side of Paris Road and north of U.S. Highway 63; authorizing execution of an easement release conveyance.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to prohibit parking along both sides of Allen Street, from Bryant Street to Trinity Place.
Authorizing conveyance of street and utility easements to The County of Boone, and a water line easement to Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri, necessary for the relocation of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at the Columbia Regional Airport.
Accepting conveyances for sewer, utility and temporary construction purposes.
Setting a public hearing: construction of sanitary sewer improvements along Providence Road from 125 feet south of Stewart Road to Turner Avenue and along Turner Avenue to Fourth Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2.
Setting a public hearing: construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle.
Authorizing various Adopt a Spot agreements.
Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with Engineering Surveys and Services for the Ninth and Elm Pedestrian Scramble Project.
Authorizing Supplemental Agreements No. 1 and 2 to the professional engineering services agreement with CDG Engineers, Inc. for design
7

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
services for construction of pedway, trail and shoulder improvements along Clark Lane between Paris Road and the east side of the Highway 63 Connector, and south along Hinkson Creek between Clark Lane and the south side of I-70.

R161-15

Approving amendments to Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO) agreements with Central Missouri Community Action, Columbia Missouri Community Housing Development Organization and Show-Me Central Habitat for Humanity.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS
R156-15 Authorizing agreements with various cultural organizations; authorizing agreements of up to $750 per agreement for arts programming or services for cultural organizations.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Musgrove provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this had come up in August. Mr. Musgrove replied yes. He explained the Chair of the Commission on Cultural Affairs had announced the Commission had made recommendations for funding in August, but had to wait until the beginning of the fiscal year to put those contracts into place. This was the authorization to enter into those contracts. Ms. Peters understood it had been a report. Mr. Musgrove stated it had essentially been a comment from the Chair thanking the Council for its support for the upcoming contracts. Mr. Skala asked how the Commission had achieved its goal of $100,000 to the dollar. Mr. Musgrove replied the amount recommended for funding was not, in most cases, the amount requested by the organization. He noted organizations could apply for up to $10,000, and the Commission reviewed and scored the applications. They then used a formula the Missouri Arts Council had used for years to reach the dollar amount the City was able to fund. The vote on R156-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

R157-15 Authorizing a software service agreement with ReCollect Systems Inc. relating to solid waste and recycling activities for City utility customers.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Glascock provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser understood this company was out of Canada and asked how they had chosen ReCollect Systems. Mr. Glascock replied he thought they probably tried to find the cheapest model that would provide the type of service they wanted. He explained the City's Information Technologies Department was unable to provide this service for another three years due to other items they were currently working on.

8

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser asked for the goals with the purchase of this service. Mr. Glascock replied residents had asked for more information on diversion rates and how they could be better informed when routes changed due to weather or holidays. The City had similar software for transit, and hoped this would assist with solid waste.
Mr. Skala asked if this would also be accessible through the website for those that did not have smartphones. Mr. Glascock replied yes.
Mr. Matthes explained solid waste calls were tied with transit as the number one type of call to the contact center. The thought was that the number of calls might be reduced with a smartphone app. Mr. Glascock noted it also enhanced their educational component as City staff educated people on recycling all of the time.
The vote on R157-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R159-15 Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with Bartlett & West, Inc. for preliminary and final design of the Forum Boulevard and Green Meadows Road intersection roundabout project.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas asked for the primary purpose of this project. Mr. Nichols replied it was to relieve congestion at the intersection. Mr. Thomas understood a typical roundabout processed traffic about 30 percent better than a 4-way stop. Mr. Nichols thought that was about right. Mr. Thomas understood pedestrian safety was improved at a roundabout compared to a 4-way stop. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct, and explained it was because the offsets were further away from the intersection. Mr. Thomas asked if Bartlett and West had designed the roundabout at Fairview Road and Rollins Road or any other roundabout in Columbia. Mr. Nichols replied no, and explained they had designed the Forum Boulevard Pedestrian Bridge. Mr. Thomas understood that had not been built yet. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct, and explained the last easement had just recently been acquired. The City would bid this out this winter. Mr. Thomas asked for references for roundabouts Bartlett and West had designed. Mr. Nichols replied he would provide that information. Mr. Skala commented that Mr. Thomas had a good point regarding the design because the public sometimes worried about the fact there were different designs. He thought it would be interesting to know the extent to which this was consistent with the existing roundabouts. Mr. Nichols explained the City had provided Bartlett and West examples already in place. Mr. Skala understood this had been a placeholder in the CIP Plan. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser asked if this would be similar to the Fairview Road roundabout. Mr. Nichols replied no. Ms. Peters asked why the City was not using the same company it had used before for roundabouts. Mr. Nichols replied Bartlett and West was a qualified engineering firm that had produced plans and specifications on time for every project they had done for the City, and
9

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
timing was critical here because this project needed to be done before starting the projects at Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard so it would help relieve congestion.
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, understood there had been talk about a roundabout in lieu of building a bridge and asked if that had been discounted or if it was still a possibility. Mr. Thomas replied he understood funding for the Forum Boulevard expansion had stayed the same in the ballot question and the ballot had passed. As a result, the project was on the CIP Plan as a funded project. He commented that he planned to continue to explore the possibility of reducing the scope of the project with roundabouts, and this was one roundabout that could help. Mr. Shanker asked if this bill included the bridge. Mr. Thomas replied no.
Steve Wendling, 555 E. Green Meadows Road, Suite 9, stated he was an advocate of the roundabout, but wanted to make sure that intersection remained open to traffic. Mr. Nichols thought they would have to build this in phases so traffic could still utilize the intersection.
Mr. Thomas stated he thought this was an excellent location for a roundabout as it would improve the flow of traffic and would bring traffic to a more appropriate speed for the area. He understood it was important for roundabouts to have high structure, such as landscaping or public art, in the middle of the so it was visible from a distance. He noted a complaint he had heard regarding the Fairview Road roundabout was that drivers did not see it coming.
Mr. Skala commented that the size of the Fairview Road roundabout was so small that it was almost like a speed bump.
Mayor McDavid suggested skeptics of roundabouts conduct a YouTube search of MythBusters roundabouts.
Mr. Ruffin asked if there was a possibility of removing the roundabout at Fairview Road due to the number of complaints. Mr. Nichols replied there had not been many reported accidents and he believed the number of complaints were fewer than when it was initially installed as people had become acclimated to it. He noted it also served the function needed for that location. He explained the reason they had not installed a typical roundabout there was because they would have had to move major water lines and purchase some homes. The roundabout also helped pedestrian flow to the school in the area. He noted they currently did not have plans to remove it.
The vote on R159-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R162-15 Consenting to the issuance of a state license for the sale of intoxicating liquor at the Clean Cut Barbershop LLC located at 510 East Green Meadows Road, Suite 105.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Blattel provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if the City had written permission from the property owners or if they had just notified them. Mr. Blattel replied they had just notified the property owners.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala asked if there were any other barber shops in Columbia that had liquor licenses. Ms. Finley replied there was one.
Ms. Peters asked if the City normally provided liquor licenses to anyone within 100 feet of a church or daycare. She wondered if this was common or unusual. Ms. Finley replied it was somewhat unusual. She explained there had been a few requests for liquor establishments within 100 feet of a church or daycare within the past 7-8 years, and those had all been brought to Council for consideration, and had all been approved.
Mr. Trapp asked if the Academy for Early Childhood Learning had been notified. Ms. Finley replied yes, and explained the communication indicated it would be discussed at tonight's meeting. She understood the owner of the Academy had received the communication due the return receipt being received.
Ms. Peters understood one person that had a child at the Academy had indicated it was a bad idea, but had also stated that his child would only be there for six more months so he did not plan to speak against it.
Mr. Trapp commented that he planned to ask for this to be tabled after public comment was taken because he wanted a better feel for it.
Steve Wendling, 555 E. Green Meadows Road, Suite 9, explained he was the landlord of the building for Clean Cut Barbershop and the owner of the Academy for Early Childhood Learning. He understood they were asking for an ancillary addition to the business of cutting hair. It was not be a beer joint or a liquor establishment as he would not allow that as the landlord. He noted he supported the request and believed it was 90 feet from the pre-school building to the back door of the barbershop.
Ms. Peters asked for the reason for serving beer while getting a haircut. Mr. Wendling replied he assumed it was for marketing purposes.
DJ Bishop explained she and Stephanie Murry had managed male hair salons in the past and were now opening this small business. She noted it would be less than five percent alcohol, which would equate to 6.3 percent by volume. It would only be beer and wine, and there would be a two drink maximum. Customers would likely drink while they were waiting for a haircut.
Richard Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, understood these people would not have had to ask Council for permission if they had been ten feet further from the pre-school, and suggested the Council approve their request.
Mr. Wendling pointed out the pre-school currently had 106 families and approximately 80 students attended the dance academy, and the objection Ms. Peters had mentioned was the only objection he had heard.
Mr. Trapp commented that in the absence of anyone opposing this he would support it. Mr. Skala stated he was curious to know more about the other similar establishment and asked staff to provide that information. Mr. Thomas stated he was supportive of this, and noted it sounded like a place in Nashville, Tennessee, which was a combined laundry mat and bar. The vote on R162-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. ABSTAIN: NAUSER. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
11

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING
The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

B281-15 B282-15 B283-15 B284-15 B285-15 B286-15 B287-15
B288-15 B289-15 B290-15 B291-15
B292-15 B293-15
B294-15

Approving a major amendment to the Boone Hospital South Campus C-P Plan located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Nifong Boulevard.
Rezoning property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road from District C-1 to District O-P; approving the statement of intent.
Approving the O-P Plan of River Region Credit Union ­ West Broadway for property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road.
Appropriating funds for repairs to the art exhibit at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial at Battle Garden.
Authorizing construction of sanitary sewers in Sewer District No. 170 (Bethel Church Road/Poplar Hill Drive); calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 3.
Authorizing a waterline replacement contract with Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri relating to the relocation of a portion of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at Columbia Regional Airport.
Authorizing grant agreements with the Mid-Missouri Solid Waste Management District for the purchase of front-loading recycling containers and apartment recycling drop off bins; appropriating funds.
Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to industrial pretreatment requirements for the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to relocate a taxi stand on Tenth Street.
Accepting donated funds and twenty-five (25) LED exterior wall sconces from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Water and Light Department for street light improvements in the downtown area; appropriating funds.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing an agreement with The Curators of the University of Missouri, on behalf of its Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, relating to emergency veterinary services for injured animals retrieved by animal control officers.
Accepting a donation from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Office of Sustainability for the Steps to Sustainability recognition program; appropriating funds.

12

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting

REP96-15 Report from Bicycle/Pedestrian Commission on Complete Streets/Intersections.

Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if this request required legislation or consensus. Mr. Thomas replied he would argue it required legislation. The City had a complete streets policy in terms of providing equitable access for automobile drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, the elderly, children, people with disabilities, etc., so everyone could navigate the community safely and effectively. He recalled the creation of complete intersection concepts was supposed to be the next step so intersections did not remain barriers. He thought the Bicycle/Pedestrian Commission was asking Council to complete the work the City did in 2004 by adding intersections to the complete streets policy and street design standards. Mr. Thomas asked if this could be written into the Code of Ordinances with the existing street design standards. Mr. Nichols replied staff wanted the opportunity to review this report and provide Council another report on this issue with their thoughts. He was concerned about mandating a policy without some flexibility. Mr. Thomas stated he was agreeable, and asked that staff provide that report. Mr. Thomas commented that a couple members of the Mayor's Task Force on Pedestrian Safety had timed how long it took to get from the northeast to the northwest corner of the Bernadette Drive and Stadium Boulevard intersection, and it had taken 5.5-9.5 minutes to traverse the three legs. He believed intersections that made it difficult for pedestrians to traverse would encourage people to take risks and cross where there was no protection. He asked staff to take that into consideration when reviewing this issue. Mr. Skala commented that he recalled they had avoided the intersections when developing the street design standards because they did not have the in-house expertise to review it at the time. He stated he did not feel they ever really had a complete streets design. Mr. Teddy explained CATSO now had a complete streets policy, and the City was part of CATSO. In addition, he would consider the existing street design standards as a complete streets code as new development of new intersections would involve complete streets and complete intersections. He thought this correspondence was targeting the retrofitting of existing intersections. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. He explained staff wanted to provide a report because it might not always be in the best interest for all legs of an intersection to allow for a crosswalk. Mr. Thomas stated he did not believe the current street design standards required complete streets and complete intersections because MoDOT could allow for only two crosswalks. Mr. Teddy explained his point was that a new subdivision on undeveloped land would include complete intersections. There were only tradeoffs with high capacity roads. Mr. Thomas commented that he believed these commissions did not feel they should reduce the level of service for pedestrians even with high capacity upgrades, such as the intersection of Bernadette Drive and Stadium Boulevard. He asked Mr. Nichols to include in his report an inventory all of the intersections in Columbia that did not have crossing access across all legs, and to explain why staff might feel it was necessary in those situations or if they felt it was not necessary.
13

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp noted there was only one marked crossing at the intersection at Range Line Street and Vandiver Drive. Mr. Matthes stated staff would include that intersection in the list to report back to Council.
REP97-15 Overview of Columbia Parking Ticket System and Enforcement.
Mayor McDavid explained he had asked for this report because he had not been comfortable with the follow up of the payments of tickets and felt this report validated his concerns. He recalled the City publishing a list of people with outstanding parking tickets about 5-6 years ago, and one person had about 100 tickets. He wanted to ensure the City was following up on citations because it was easy to ignore, and he did not feel they had good system as it appeared as though a third of the tickets were not paid. He viewed a ticket as an account receivable, and thought the Finance Department needed to be involved. He also believed vehicles should be towed on the spot if they had at least three previous unpaid tickets. He pointed out they had to restrict parking, otherwise students would store their cars in those locations and it would be difficult for customers of commerce to park. He thought they needed to charge enough to ensure 15 percent of the spaces were open, and to penalize those that did not pay. He commented that this was important because that $900,000 allowed the City to break even in terms of municipal court and parking enforcement operations. He did not believe the City should leave $400,000 on the table as that would allow for more police officers. He asked City staff to manage this more aggressively.
Mr. Thomas stated he agreed with Mayor McDavid. He noted one of the messages he learned at the recent parking workshop was that if they did not do a good job of enforcement, the entire system would begin to fail and people would expect not to have to pay their parking tickets. A suggestion they were told that had been successful was to provide a warning with an explanation of the cost of the fine next time they did not pay, and to increase the fine substantially for any subsequent violation.
Mr. Thomas thought the City had a policy on towing and asked for clarification. Mr. Matthes replied he would characterize it as fairly lenient. The City provided 24-hour notice that the car would be towed after the fourth ticket. As a result, most people moved their vehicles. Mr. Thomas asked if they had to pay the four fines. Mr. Matthes replied it was still due to the City, but if the vehicle was moved, the City could not tow it. They had to find it again in order to tow it. Mr. Thomas understood it was then towed without another 24-hour notice. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct. He thought staff needed to analyze collection and enforcement and provide Council a recommended course of action to improve the situation.
Ms. Peters asked if the parking tickets were being paid more promptly now that the fine was $15 instead of $5. Mr. Matthes replied he thought they could provide that data to Council.
Mr. Skala understood a tow also involved police presence as parking utility personnel was not authorized to intervene with regard to a tow truck. Mr. Matthes replied he did not recall and would provide that information to Council as well. Mr. Skala thought if this was true, it would require a higher dedication to towing for the Police Department, which could create an extra burden.
14

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp understood enforcement should be friendly and certain, and the facilitator of the parking workshop had recommendation a quick graduated increase so a person was not penalized for an inadvertent situation.
Ms. Peters understood the fine was $15 if paid within 15 days, and increased to $30 if not paid then. She noted that got her attention over the previous $5 fines.
Mr. Thomas commented that the recommendation at the parking workshop was for the next parking ticket to go from $30 to $50 or something of that nature, and for the rates to be publicized.
Mr. Trapp pointed out some people already felt parking tickets were outrageously high since they had increased from $5 to $15. He thought they needed to look at what the citizenry was used to as some felt it was high and others felt it was low.
Mr. Skala noted some people felt the City was making a profit on parking tickets. Mayor McDavid thought citizens needed to understand this $950,000 only covered the cost of municipal court and the parking enforcement. He pointed out he did not want to leave money on the table due to people violating rules and regulations. He also wanted to hire a couple police officers on those increased collections.
REP98-15 2015 Our Natural Legacy Implementation Actions Report.
Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if the Environment and Energy Commission (EEC) could weigh in on this topic. Mr. Griggs replied he would be glad to share this report and noted the meeting on January 19, 2016 would be a closed session. Mr. Skala stated that type of detail did not need to be provided to the EEC. He suggested providing them anything that would not necessarily be closed.
REP99-15 Vision Commission Media Mentions Report.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP100-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, commented that residents were getting conflicting reports on the cause of the water on William Street, and hoped the City would address the issue by this summer. He thought the City needed to dig it up to determine the source of the water.
John Conway, 4902 Thornbrook Ridge, stated he was the Chair of the Water and Light Advisory Board, and that depreciation was documented in budget for the water and electric utilities. It was about $2.7 million in the water utility and $14.7 million in the electric utility, and those funds had been expensed and would flow to the bottom line since depreciation was not paid to anyone else, and the money would lose its identity from depreciation to cash reserves.
15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Matthes understood there had been questions as to why the citizen handbook was mailed to every residential address in the community. He noted the cost had been $63,000 for the entire project, which was about $1 per household. He agreed it would have been cheaper to just place the handbook on the web for people to view, and for a few copies to be available for people to pick up if they wanted it, but he did not feel it communicated as well. He explained the people that had an interest in the City and would search for the link to read the handbook were the same people that subscribed to the newspaper and cable television. The City only reached one percent of the community via the website, and a potential of 20 percent with the other venues. He noted the only method by which they could reach every household was by mail, which was why they had made that decision. He understood some people were critical by how good the handbook looked, and explained they had showcased art within the community in hopes people would read it and leave it on their coffee tables.
Mr. Skala stated he appreciated this outreach because there were many people that did not avail themselves of information on the internet. He asked if this would be an annual commitment. Mr. Matthes replied yes. He explained it included a condensed version of the "State of the City" along with useful information with regard to city services, etc. In future years, they also wanted to report on progress of the strategic plan.
Mr. Trapp asked why it had been so cheap. Mr. Matthes replied the University of Missouri, who already had the capacity, had printed the handbook for the City, and the way it was delivered had been helpful as well. The City paid the bulk rate so it was provided to everyone on the mail route, and the post office did not have to sort it, etc. Mr. Trapp commented that this explained why it might have come to the residence and businesses of some people.
Ms. Peters understood the Council had received a report on October 20, 2014 with regard to backflow valves in relation to the sewer system, and asked if an update on that report could be received as to what was needed to move forward.
Ms. Peters asked about the process with regard to street closures in relation to the Red Bull request. Mr. Matthes replied an applicant had the right to appeal to Council if staff denied a street closure request. In the abundance of customer service, staff placed it on the agenda thinking Red Bull would appeal the decision, but they had not appealed it, and staff forgot to remove it from the agenda prior to its finalization.
Ms. Peters asked if there was a mechanism to notify neighborhoods that someone was asking for a street closure. Mr. Matthes replied the affected residents were supposed to be notified.
Ms. Peters asked if the neighborhood association was notified when a street closure was placed on a council meeting agenda. Mr. Matthes replied no. He explained there was not an obligation on the City or the applicant to notify a neighborhood association. Ms. Peters understood they should have been notified when the application was submitted. Mr. Matthes clarified only the adjoining property owners were required to be notified of the application.
Mr. Skala asked if this was subject to the 185 foot notification rule. Mr. Matthes replied no. In this situation only the adjoining property owners were notified. He explained the
16

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
ordinance was created for events downtown, but in this situation they had been looking at a residential street.
Mr. Thomas commented that the City had established a Youth Advisory Council about six months ago, and several members had expressed interest in attending the National League of Cities (NLC) Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year. He wanted to provide the opportunity to two students that had made compelling arguments to attend, and the cost was estimated to about $3,000. He understood there was also a need for a chaperone to attend, which would likely be a parent, and the City would not cover that cost.
Mr. Thomas made a motion to allocate $3,000 from the council reserve fund to support two Youth Advisory Commission student members to attend the NLC Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year.
Ms. Nauser stated she would not be able to attend the NLC Conference this year, and would be agreeable to $1,500 of her travel funds to be allocated for this trip.
Mr. Skala commented that he believed the information obtained at the NLC Conference would be very valuable, and thought it would be beneficial to youth to become involved in governmental issues.
Mayor McDavid stated he would not support this request as he did not believe this was a priority over other needs, such as police officers and firefighters.
Mr. Thomas revised his motion to be an allocation of $1,500 from the council reserve fund and an allocation of $1,500 from the money allocated to Ms. Nauser for travel for two student members of the Youth Advisory Commission to attend the NLC Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved by voice vote with only Mayor McDavid voting no.
Mr. Thomas stated he believed red light cameras were important in ensuring people obeyed the rules of the road to create a safer community. He did not believe the City had or would use them as revenue generators and felt that could be demonstrated. He, however, did not understand why they had to contract with a private company for the services. He asked why the City could not purchase and install the cameras in addition to providing staff for the review of photos and the issuance of tickets. Mr. Matthes replied he thought that could be done. It would, however, be more expensive. In the past, the company had provided the equipment and had conducted the initial screening so that what they sent the City was high quality video for final review and issuance of the ticket. He explained the City was preparing a presentation on red light cameras for Council consideration. Mr. Thomas commented that if the City were to implement red light cameras again, he would like how the money raised was utilized to be very transparently demonstrated.
Mr. Thomas explained he wanted to validate the comments of Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp and Ms. Ladehoff as he felt he was going through an epiphany on race relations and discrimination in Columbia and throughout the United States. He commented that he had started to educate himself on the history of slavery and the history of Africans in America. He admired those involved with Race Matters for pushing this issue. He understood the solutions would not be easy, but that one of the solutions was to look into the way the Police
17

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Department operated. He commented that he agreed it was far too easy for middle class white people to comfortably go through life without really trying to understand the issues others in the community experienced, and once those issues were investigated, those involved tended to not be compelled to be silent any longer.
Mr. Skala understood the NLC had a new group called Racial Equity in Leadership, which had been established last year. He noted he would participate as a member of this group in November, and hoped to bring information back to the Council that might be useful. He commented that he believed professional development was a way to break through the parochial barriers. It provided the opportunity to learn about solutions and failures on other communities in order to better Columbia. He noted $1,500 for travel would not fund a police officer. He stated he would love to have more police officers, and pointed out they had attempted to fund more officers through a ballot issue last November, which had failed. A police officer would cost $100,000 per year and $2 million in terms of a career. He thought providing money for youth to attend the NLC Conference was a valuable investment, which he would defend.
Mr. Skala asked staff to follow up on the water issue on William Street that Mr. Shanker had mentioned as he did not want it to persist. Mr. Matthes replied staff had located at least one break, but there could be more. The particular break was found between the water system and the house so it was a private water break. He understood the property owner knew about it and was committed to fixing it. Mr. Skala suggested a further follow up.
Mr. Skala commented that he had voted against red light cameras in the past, but noted he was willing to hear arguments that they really did provide public safety. He stated he would like data to be provided from the intersections at which the red light cameras had been located so they had the information to determine whether to extend the red light camera program or not.
Ms. Nauser asked if there was a way for a sensor to determine that someone was at a HAWK crossing on College Avenue without the person pushing the button to cross. She understood people would cross without pushing the button if there was not a lot of traffic, which was not safe. She was hoping the system would allow lights to flash if someone was just in the vicinity.
Ms. Nauser commented that a constituent had asked if bus routes could be changed so people were not dropped off and picked up on the shoulder of Providence Road, especially in the evening when it was difficult to see, and had suggested utilizing the outer road instead. She asked about the possibility.
Ms. Nauser stated she and Mr. Thomas had participated in a meeting regarding sidewalk repair and felt they needed to know the conditions of sidewalks throughout the community. She asked staff to create a sidewalk needs matrix so they knew exactly where repairs were needed and how badly they were needed. She thought they would have more credibility if they knew the exact needs.
18

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser noted there had previously been potholes on Parkade Boulevard, near the Moberly Area Community College, and those potholes had been repaired, but the road was still in disrepair as it was very bumpy. She asked staff to look into the issue as it needed to be resolved, especially if the work was done by a private contractor.
Ms. Nauser explained there was a proliferation of flag signs within right-of-ways notifying people of the desire to purchase cars, where flu shots could be received, etc., and people dancing and twirling signs outside of some business locations, and asked staff to look into the issue in terms of a potential amendment to the Code of Ordinances as these tended to be permanent signs instead of temporary signs.
Ms. Nauser commented that she had provided staff a $13,000 invoice from a constituent for stormwater repair for property at the corner of Brookdale Court and Elsdon Drive in the Highlands Subdivision. She understood stormwater had backed up on to Highlands Parkway, and the City had cut an inlet to relieve that problem. In doing so, that water was now on this property, and a bid to address the problem had come in at $13,000. She stated staff had indicated they would look into the issue, but understood the constituent had still not been contacted. She asked for a status report.
Ms. Nauser explained she had been contacted by a constituent that had indicated she had been trying to work with REDI, and wondered if they had a database that sent individuals that contacted them information about entrepreneurial opportunities, seminars, and workshops. The constituent had indicated she had learned about a seminar that would have benefitted her had she been notified. She thought this service might be useful in terms of informational outreach.
Ms. Nauser noted the outer roadway where Stoney Creek Inn was located was very dark and dangerous, and with many student apartments, students walked along the roadway in the evening. She asked staff to look at the potential of adding street lights or an interim shoulder along the road. She understood students were walking along the road to get to Providence Road and ultimately University of Missouri property.
Ms. Nauser stated a homeowners association had provided her a list of sidewalk gaps for which they wanted City assistance with in addressing the issues. She noted she would provide the list to staff and thought she might receive one or two others, which she would pass along.
Ms. Nauser pointed out she had a lot of angry and upset constituents with regard to the transmission lines being constructed in the southwest part of the community, and asked staff to provide a report, which include the history and future time line of the project. She wanted the dates and places of the interested parties meetings and public hearings, the potential issues, if applicable, to the City's bond rating and funding should a new route be determined, the benefits versus costs of Option A versus Option B, the impact of changing the scope of the project to Option B, and the time line of the project to include the second
19

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
phase, which would connect the McBaine substation at Highpoint Lane to be included in the report. She understood many people thought that section of the power lines would not be constructed so there would not be power lines by Rock Bridge Elementary School.
Ms. Nauser provided the list that summarized her requests of staff. Mr. Trapp stated a constituent had contacted him about his experience calling the utility customer line. The constituent had had a long wait, was disconnected, and then had another long wait, and had indicated this was a regular occurrence. He asked for information regarding wait times. Mr. Matthes replied the Council approved the addition of two people for that exact purpose so the situation should improve. Mr. Ruffin explained he was continuing to work with the Columbia Alliance to Combat Homelessness (CATCH), and this group was meeting with neighborhood associations tomorrow at 6:30 p.m. at Jefferson Middle School to hear their concerns and respond to questions. He thought this issue would come to Council at its next meeting. Mayor McDavid understood Columbia was at $97.50, which was higher in terms of the cost of living than any other community in Missouri, but less than the $100.00 national average. He noted the utility costs were at $106.10, and thought the City owed its citizens an explanation. The meeting adjourned at 9:13 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
20

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI OCTOBER 19, 2015
INTRODUCTORY The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on Monday, October 19, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID and RUFFIN were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES The minutes of the regular meeting of September 21, 2015 were approved
unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Skala.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA Mayor McDavid noted B301-15 and B314-15 needed to be removed from the agenda,
and B315-15 needed to be added to the introduction and first reading section of the agenda. The agenda, including the consent agenda and B301-15 and B314-15 being removed
from the agenda and B315-15 being added to the introduction and first reading section of the agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Skala.
SPECIAL ITEMS None.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS Upon receiving the majority vote of the Council, the following individuals were
appointed to the following Boards and Commissions.
BICYCLE/PEDESTRIAN COMMISSION Boyd, Elke, 2004 N. Parklawn Court, Ward 2, Term to expire July 31, 2018
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2020
CITIZENS POLICE REVIEW BOARD DeBrunce, Val, 6302 Upper Bridle Bend Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Fisher, Andrew, 1510 Richardson Street, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Sheltmire, Steve, 1908 Tremont Court, Ward 4, Term to expire November 1, 2018
CITY OF COLUMBIA NEW CENTURY FUND, INC. BOARD Grabau, Andrew, 701 E. Rockcreek Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire September 30, 2018
1

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
COLUMBIA COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION Fletcher, Michael, 912 Hickory Hill Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2018
COLUMBIA VISION COMMISSION Follett, Daniel, 3111 Skylark Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire December 15, 2017 Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire December 15, 2016 Marshall, Susan, 601 Westwood Avenue, Ward 4, Term to expire December 15, 2016
COMMISSION ON CULTURAL AFFAIRS Bondeson, William, 913 Leland Ridge Road, Ward 4, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Schmitz, Carol, 2103 Winchester Drive, Ward 2, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Williams, William, 306 Clark Street, Boone County, Term to expire October 31, 2018
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION Compton, Tonia, 2801 W. Broadway #T3, Ward 1, Term to expire December 31, 2016
MAYOR'S COUNCIL ON PHYSICAL FITNESS AND HEALTH Ramirez, Jose, 2240 Bennett Springs Drive Apt. 8, Ward 6, Term to expire November 30, 2016
SUBSTANCE ABUSE ADVISORY COMMISSION Borgmeyer, Molly, 25 N. Grace Lane 101, Ward 3, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Priesmeyer, Joseph, 1705 Chapel Hollow Court, Ward 4, Term to expire October 31, 2018
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI EXTENSION COUNCIL OF BOONE COUNTY Sallee, Thomas, 2006 Americus Drive, Ward 2, Term to expire March 1, 2017
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Sky Jimenez - Response to task force recommendation for providing identification and treatment of mental health issues in the schools.
Ms. Jimenez, 3101 Abbywood Drive, explained she had resided in Columbia since 1971 and had been a teacher and counselor for the Columbia Public Schools. She understood the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence had a recommendation involving children's mental health issues and services. She noted the issue was not identification as every teacher could identify children that needed services. The issues included the lack of services, especially for very young children, the fact only few therapists accepted Medicaid, and transportation to those services. She stated she was excited and encouraged by the Task Force recommendation for the Columbia Public Schools and the City of Columbia to work together on this issue, the sales tax that had passed to help fund these services, and the programs that were currently being developed, such as the Family Access Center for Excellence (FACE), which provided centralized services for children and their families. She commented that children from areas of poverty needed access to the same services as other children, and noted children who were provided services were less likely to become involved
2

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
with crime. She explained that children were also often placed in foster care when families did not receive needed services, and children that were at high risk were more likely to not complete high school and more likely to get involved with crime, which resulted in incarceration that was costly to everyone. She asked the Council to help support and promote programs that provided access to children and families, and to invite Aaron Thompson, the Director of FACE, and Kelly Wallis, the Director of the Boone County Community Services, to speak to the City Council about the programs and needs they now had. She also encouraged the City and Schools to work together to allow therapists to meet with children in school buildings as that would address the issue of transportation. Finally, she asked the Council for support of more and longer summer programs as services were sometimes dropped then because there was not a place to meet.
Pack Matthews ­ Challenge and opportunities before Columbia community, and ways to leverage privileged status to help heal the racial divide.
Mr. Matthews commented that he was speaking on behalf of Faith Voices, which was a network of faith communities throughout the State, and was in support of the efforts of Race Matters. He believed white people, like him, had the opportunity to change the course of racism in the community. He explained it was easy for those raised to see themselves as white people to think this did not impact their lives because they were not behaving in an overtly bigoted way. He stated he did not believe, as white people, they could experience their full humanity if they continued to avoid facing their history and continued to pretend a social system that worked well for a few of them would not hurt them. He commented that the notion of race had been created by his ancestors in the early days of the United States to keep the Irish from thinking they had an equal stake in the country. The key mark of white privilege was the extent to which a person believed racism did not touch them. Those that assumed incarceration rates, predatory lending, racial profiling, the distant expressions of racism throughout the world, and hunger statistics were not the primary threat to the white person or family were enjoying the temporary bubble of white privilege. He noted it would be painful when that bubble busted, but it had already occurred demographically as white people were the minority in global terms. He commented that those that popped the bubble of the myth themselves could liberate themselves and be exposed to a grand vista of possibilities, in terms of human connections and mental and emotional health. He thought they had seen an example of this at the recent Homecoming Parade when a group of courageous black students took their message to the streets by blocking the vehicle of the University of Missouri President, Tim Wolfe, and holding an education rally after attempting to reach Mr. Wolfe through every respectable channel. After a while, a group of white people decided to use their white privilege to get between the student and the vehicle to protect Mr. Wolfe, and later other white people decided to stand with the black students causing the initial group of white people to disappear so they did not appear to be standing with the black students. He stated white privilege was dependent upon how white people acted around one another. He suggested white people talk about racial issues on their own prior to a person of color entering a room or joining an organization. He also suggested they start changing their language by saying phrases similar to "my white friend" or "my white plumber" as that would
3

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
help to show the edges of privilege and change the community in many ways. He commented that the myth of whiteness was a myth, and asked his fellow white people to help lead citizens into a new community by not trading their humanity for trinkets of security.
Grace Vega ­ Task Force on Community Violence recommendations ­ community policing.
Ms. Vega, 3008 Middlebush Drive, explained she had resided in Columbia since 2002, and thanked Mr. Thomas, the Ward 4 Council Member, for his recent extreme responsiveness to Race Matters and the need to dismantle systemic racism in Columbia and its institutions. She commented that she had long been aware of racial inequities and disparities in health care and education, and noted she felt she had made considerable contributions to leveling the playing field in the healthcare systems in Columbia through her work of coordinating interpreting translation services for over 90 different languages. It, however, had taken the recent and far too numerous violent confrontations between police and people of color to move her to a more active role in helping to dismantle racism as its manifest in the arena of criminal justice and public safety. She had discovered Columbia was ahead of the game as the Council had already commissioned the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, who had created a remarkably complete list of recommendations to improve processes, procedures, and outcomes in this regard. One recommendation was to implement community policing and positive communication between police and residents, and this recommendation appeared to resonate with people in various levels of government. Her concern was that "community policing" was currently only a buzz word because there seemed to be a lack of common understanding and definition for community policing amongst leaders and community members. Definitions had ranged from the presence of two officers in Douglass Park with possible expansion in other neighborhoods to the assignment of patrol sergeants and officers to specific beats within their sector where they focused on building relationships with citizens and businesses in efforts to solve problems. She understood community policing efforts had begun and had lasted for a couple of years in the late 1990's, and that those efforts had been abandoned due to the lack of Council support. She asked if there was agreement amongst all of the leadership within the City as to what community policing was, how it needed to be implemented, how training would funded, and how hiring practices would change. She stated the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program of the Department of Justice (DOJ) had listed three components to community policing, and those were community partnerships, organizational transformation, and problem solving. She noted she was happy the Police Department had applied for and had received Procedural Justice Training in August as it was a good start toward the organizational transformation piece of community policing, and wondered what steps were being taken to create community partnerships, as she felt that was the bedrock of the model and the basis for the identification of problems and solutions that were discovered. She explained she hoped to be provided answers in upcoming meetings.
Ms. Nauser pointed out the Police Department was planning to host an event on Friday, October 23, 2015 at 7:00 p.m. in City Hall. Ms. Vega stated she had that on her calendar.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Dick Parker ­ Clean Power Plan.
Mr. Parker, 215 W. Sexton Road, provided a handout and explained the Clean Power Plan regulations had been released by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in August and it had called for a 37 percent reduction in the tons of carbon dioxide emissions in Missouri by 2030. The 37 percent was based upon the quantity of carbon dioxide emitted from electric generators in 2012. He noted it was currently unknown how that reduction would be distributed, but he thought Columbia could use 37 percent as an approximation of what would need to be achieved. He believed this would need to be accomplished with renewable energy and a reduction in demand through energy efficiency, and noted Columbia had been a leader in these aspects in Missouri. He commented that carbon dioxide production in Columbia was essentially equivalent to the use of non-renewable energy, and a 37 percent reduction would be difficult to achieve. In fact, a 53 percent increase in demand for services provided by electricity had been projected over this period. There would be an increase of non-renewable energy and carbon dioxide of 16 percent even with the 30 percent renewable energy goal. He stated the projected demand would result in the City producing 84 percent more carbon dioxide than the projected goal of a 37 percent reduction. He reiterated the two ways to achieve the goal were more renewable energy and less demand for electricity, and they would need to use both approaches. Energy efficiency was less expensive than energy from renewable energy or non-renewable energy. He suggested they embrace as much reduction in demand through energy efficiency as possible over the next 15 years, so they did not have to generate the extra energy from renewable sources. The least costly way to achieve energy efficiency was by building it into new buildings, but construction over the next 15 years would not achieve the goal, and the majority of the reduction in demand would have to come from energy efficiency in existing buildings. Some technological changes, such as LED lights, would help, but those technological changes alone would not achieve the goal. He noted savings from energy efficiency made money saved on utility bills available to citizens to spend in Columbia and the costs of creating energy efficiency went to businesses working in Columbia, and both were economic development. He thought they needed to think of this in those terms. He asked the Council to support the International Building Codes for energy efficient residential and commercial buildings. He understood the Council had supported this for residential buildings in the recent past, and noted commercial buildings used the same quantity of electricity as residential buildings. He recommended the Council support both the residential and commercial energy efficiency chapters of the International Building Codes as written. He pointed out they would need to make substantial progress by the first intermediate goal in 2022.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction and installation of concrete pads and bus shelters at various locations throughout the city.
Item A was read by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report.
5

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Mayor McDavid understood the staff report had indicated the estimated cost of each shelter was $11,000, but the total project cost was $569,000 for 18 shelters, and asked for clarification. Mr. Brooks replied the shelter alone was $11,000 each. They were estimating about $20,000 per location as they would need to add sidewalks and other features in some areas to allow for better access. The entire $560,000 amount would be the total project cost, and these were the 18 high priority locations. Mayor McDavid understood more locations would be considered, and the $569,000 would be spent. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct.
Mayor McDavid stated this appeared to be permanent construction and asked if staff was confident in the site selections. Mr. Brooks replied staff anticipated these 18 locations would be utilized based on ridership reports and past data from old routes as they were in high traffic areas. They anticipated these would be locations on routes even with changes in the future.
Mr. Skala agreed bus shelters were essential, but thought they should try to minimize the cost of the bus shelters as much as possible. He asked for the cost of the bus shelters currently in place. Mr. Brooks replied they were within $8,000 and $10,000 depending on whether they included light fixtures and other amenities.
Mr. Skala understood the goal was to get as many bus shelters as possible on routes that were the most dependable, but wondered if they should move to secondary routes if there were issues with regard to purchasing rights-of-way. He noted there were not many routes in the Third Ward and felt something needed to be placed in the corridor between the downtown and Battle High School. He asked about secondary plans if the priority locations did not work out. Mr. Brooks explained they had identified 34 locations, and these were the first 18 based upon connection points and ridership reports. He stated there were some in the Third Ward.
Mr. Thomas stated there had been discussion in the past about encouraging sponsors or businesses close to the locations to advertise on part of the bus shelter to help with costs, and asked where those discussions stood. Mr. Brooks replied advertising on the bus shelters would require ordinance changes, and they had not planned to move forward with changes at this time. He pointed out they had planned to add art components to the shelters to prevent graffiti. He noted advertising could be looked into further if it was desired by the Council. Mr. Thomas asked if he had any sense of the amount of money the City could receive from advertisements on bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied no. Mr. Nichols explained the first step was to obtain permission to move forward with the shelters.
Mr. Trapp understood a shelter already existed at the Library and asked why it was being removed and replaced. Mr. Brooks replied they would place a shelter on the opposite side of the street, and preferred for the two shelters to match and have the same type of design elements. The existing shelter would be moved to another location, and would not be discarded.
Mr. Ruffin commended staff for identifying the First Ward for many of the shelter location as he believed it moved the City closer in its agenda of social equity. He asked at what point in the process staff would entertain recommendations for alternative sites. Mr. Brooks replied at any time in the process. Mr. Ruffin stated he had been contacted by the Montessori School on the corner of Providence Road and Sexton Road with regard to
6

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
pedestrians taking refuge under their canopy, and asked staff to try to accommodate that particular location with a bench or shelter. Mr. Brooks replied he would look into that location.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Cheryl Price, 511 Parkade Boulevard, stated she was the current Chair of the Public Transit Advisory Commission and had also served on the Disabilities Commission for over six years. She commented that she had first thought of transportation from the viewpoint of disabled people, but now understood public transportation needed to be available for all citizens in the community as good public transportation would lead to a quality community and could improve the economy. She also understood safe and comfortable shelters were an integral part of the public transit system. The shelters would be in panels that could be dismantled for relocation or an exchange if a panel was damaged, which would save money in the long run. She thought it was important to continue working on the public transit system, and asked the Council for its assistance by appropriating money for bus shelters. Brook Jacobs, 12 E. Ridgely Road, stated he was a member of the Library Board and noted the Library Board had met on October 15 because they understood a new bus stop would be placed in front of the Library. He explained the Board felt the current bus stop was adequate as it was covered and located in a well-lighted area, but if it were to be replaced, the Board wanted to be consulted with regard to the associated artwork and lighting to ensure it was in concert with what was already at the Library. He pointed out the Board also preferred to enter into a memorandum of understanding instead of granting an easement for this purpose. He understood that might save the City some money. He noted 1,700 people utilized the Library every day, and the Board was thankful for the bus stop as a fair amount of the people used public transportation. Ed Baker explained he represented the Holiday Inn Executive Center, and stated he had concerns regarding a proposed bus shelter at Knipp Street and Bernadette Drive as he did not feel it was a safe place to cross, especially when they had thousands of people leaving after a convention. He suggested it be moved further down to the next crosswalk or be re-routed to the side adjacent to the Columbia Mall as riders were likely headed there. He noted his preference was for it to be moved adjacent to the Mall. Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, commented that she was elated there would be bus shelters as she did not like seeing people standing on the side of road or waiting in the weeds or out in the sun. She hoped some shelters would be placed along Providence Road in the future as well. Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, asked about the mobility of the bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied the shelters and benches could be moved easily, but the concrete was more permanent and would have to be broken out. Mr. Shanker asked if the shelters would come pre-built. Mr. Brooks replied no, and explained they would come in panels for assembly in whatever formation the City chose. Dennis Thompson stated he resided on Blue Grouse Drive and understood the City wanted to place a shelter on Blue Ridge Road, between Providence Road and Range Line Street, which would require an 8 foot by 16 foot portion of his property. He commented that he did not have an issue with helping out the City, but was concerned about a shelter in his back yard only 40 feet from his house. He noted there was a ditch in the area, and wondered
7

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
if that would create issues or if he would be responsible for maintaining the ditch in terms of trash, etc. He was also concerned about people tearing up his property, which would decrease his property value.
Brad Eiffert, 1000 Hulen Drive, stated he owned Boone County Lumber and the adjacent parcels at Range Line Street and Rogers Street, and the bus stop was currently his neighbor's front porch when there was inclement weather. On nicer days, transit riders would wait on a big stone in the landscaped area of his property. He noted he was supportive of a bus shelter at this location as long as there was not a legal encumbrance, such as an easement, the sale or renting of the property, etc. He also wanted to ensure the shelter would be moved if the bus route changed or if he requested it to be moved due to future development or the realignment of streets. He reiterated he would be delighted to support public transportation if that type of flexibility existed. He also asked for a trash can and cigarette butt can to be provided at the shelter in hopes of lessening the amount of trash on his property. He explained the idea of sponsorship had not been discussed with him, but noted he would be happy to consider something in keeping with an adjacent forest product company.
Dan Cullimore, 715 Lyon Street, explained he was the President of the North Central Columbia Neighborhood Association (NCCNA) and noted the NCCNA was the beneficiary of a grant the Public Health and Human Services Department had received to promote active living and healthy lifestyles. He pointed out this benefit included funding for bus shelters at a couple locations. He stated he was happy to bring the full support of the NCCNA to encourage bus shelters as he believed it was important in gaining ridership.
Alyce Turner, 1204 Fieldcrest, stated she was on the Public Transit Advisory Commission and asked why the buses could not travel closer to the Columbia Mall, and suggested the Council address this with management at the Mall. She thought it would be an ideal and much safer stop.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, understood bus shelters on Providence Road was a traffic flow issue as it would be difficult to pull buses over on narrow four lane streets, and a solution was to utilize Fifth Street. He did not feel that solved the problem for the Montessori School on Providence Road in terms of crosswalks, etc. He suggested the funding for the transit system and sidewalks be connected as they were heavily interrelated. He understood some citizens were concerned about trash at the bus shelters, and thought the City needed to build clean-up, policing, and other costs into the system. He commented that he did not feel locations should be chosen based upon resources as there needed to be a better balance between burdens and benefits. He hoped this balance would be much more openly addressed and that locations would not be chosen solely due to costs for the overall support of the transit system.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Thomas stated he appreciated the efforts of City staff in communicating with individual property owners to find workable solutions, and felt some of the concerns of bus stops in front of private property would go away as public transportation became more accepted and there was more ridership. Mr. Thomas understood each location would have a
8

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
trash can. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. He pointed out a service worker had been added to the budget to help with the maintenance of the shelters in anticipation of this.
Mr. Thomas asked if staff planned to talk to the Library about the design of the shelter by it. Mr. Brooks replied yes. He noted they planned to talk to interested parties for each location with regard to the art components.
Mr. Thomas commented that he was not sure how to address the issue for the Holiday Inn as he felt shelters were needed on both sides of the road, and suspected many people that worked at the Holiday Inn used public transportation to get there. He thought a crosswalk across Bernadette Drive was needed so people did not have to go to Stadium Boulevard to cross.
Mr. Thomas stated he thought these bus shelters were a great step forward as this was a social equity issue. People traveling in vehicles had a more safety and comfort in getting around than those utilizing the bus. He believed this would make a big difference to the experience of bus riders and was important in terms of growing ridership. He commented that he was in Gainesville, Florida last week, and Gainesville had very well-developed bus system, which solved many kinds of problems. He stated he was happy to support this project. He was also happy to know they had reached an agreement with a consultant to assist with a long-range planning process to improve the system.
Mr. Skala agreed the bus shelters were sorely needed throughout the community, but could not believe each shelter would cost $11,000. He thought they could install more shelters if the cut the in half, and preferred functionality over aesthetics at this time as he did not believe the average bus shelters were unattractive. He wanted them to get the most out of the money they had. He thought memorandums of understanding might be better than obtaining easements in terms of overall costs and the portability of the shelters. He believed the bus shelter project was long overdue, and asked staff to attempt to install as many shelters as possible.
Mayor McDavid commented that most of this money was coming from a Federal Transit Administration (FTA) grant, and he did not believe they could assume they would receive more funding in the future. He hoped the Public Transit Advisory Commission (PTAC) followed the use of this money closely and that there would be 50 shelters in the community in ten years as he felt there was enough money.
Ms. Nauser understood the cost would be $100 per bus shelter for maintenance, repair, and cleaning and asked if staff would clean up around the facility in addition to taking care of the trash in the trash cans. Mr. Brooks replied yes.
Ms. Nauser stated she had advocated for bus shelters in the past as she did not feel it was right for public transportation users to have to stand outside in inclement weather, and hoped the shelters would be installed quickly. She agreed this would improve the City's bus system, and hoped it would result in a higher ridership. She also hoped staff would investigate investment from the private sector in terms of advertising on bus shelters as the transit system would benefit from more money for more shelters and routes.
Mr. Nichols pointed out $500,000 had been included for shelters as part of the capital improvement sales tax ballot issue, which had passed, and that funding was in addition to the funding for this project so more shelters could be installed in the future.
9

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters asked how many bus shelters the City presently had. Mr. Brooks replied the City had 26 shelters, and about seven of them were at locations that were not currently serviced. Staff planned to move those while they were waiting on the new shelters to be delivered. Ms. Peters understood there would be 44 bus shelters once this project was complete. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Ms. Peters asked how many shelters they wanted to have throughout the City. Mr. Brooks replied some people wanted a shelter at every stop, but that was obviously not feasible. He explained there were 34 connection points so the goal was to have one at every connection point. Ms. Peters asked if the 18 shelters they were discussing now would all be at connection points. Mr. Brooks replied he thought all but two would be at connection points.
Ms. Peters asked if staff had communicated with the Columbia Mall regarding a bus stop there. Mr. Brook replied the City had gone onto Mall property about ten years ago, but had been asked to not go onto the property any longer because the structure of the parking lot was not built for the constant passage of very heavy buses. Ms. Peters asked if that was still true. Mr. Brooks replied he did not know. Ms. Peters asked if staff could check. Mr. Brooks replied yes, and pointed out City staff preferred not to go onto private property, especially during high traffic times, as that would slow the routes down significantly.
Mr. Trapp noticed the bench had been removed from an old bus stop on the north side of Leslie Lane in front of McKnight Plaza, and asked if that was standard practice. Mr. Brooks replied he would need to check and get back to Mr. Trapp.
Mr. Trapp asked if City staff could look at alternatives to the shelter on Blue Ridge Road that would impact the property of Mr. Thompson. He understood there was a need for a shelter in the area due to ridership numbers, but wondered if there were options of other locations. He stated he was glad to know maintenance had been increased, and noted he had found bus stops to be fairly well maintained in general. He commented that he missed having the trash can at the stop on Leslie Lane as it served more people than transit riders, and suggested they look at street trash cans and whether those cost could be folded into the overall solid waste costs. One of the greatest complaints he tended to receive involved litter, and it was difficult to deal with litter in terms of enforcement. He noted the City had various departments picking up trash, and wondered if they could have solid waste pick up all of the City's trash and if they could combine systems to incorporate a street trash can system as well.
Mr. Trapp also wondered if they needed to change an already well-functioning and popular bus stop at the Library only so the design matched the one across the street. He stated he could live with it if they were only swapping it out, but did not feel they needed to acquire an easement for it. Mr. Brooks stated he did not believe it would involve an easement. They were only swapping it out. The existing shelter would then be used elsewhere. Mr. Trapp understood there would not be a new pad. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Mr. Trapp was agreeable to the shelters matching if all else was equal and the existing shelter would be used elsewhere.
Mr. Skala suggested benches at some locations as that would not require the $11,000 outlay per shelter. It would also allow for the pad to be there for a shelter to be placed in those locations in the future if there was funding. He asked if that was a possibility. Mr.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Brooks replied the City had a few benches in storage so it would only be a matter of pouring concrete to install the benches. He pointed out this grant was specifically for bus shelters.
Mr. Skala made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the project. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
OLD BUSINESS
B287-15 Authorizing a waterline replacement contract with Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri relating to the relocation of a portion of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at Columbia Regional Airport.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend B287-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. B287-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B291-15 Accepting donated funds and twenty-five (25) LED exterior wall sconces from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Water and Light Department for street light improvements in the downtown area; appropriating funds.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen and Mr. Williams provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this type of lighting already existed in locations downtown. Mr. Williams replied the Downtown Community Improvement District (CID) had installed some of the wall sconces in the north-south alley between Harpo's and the Pizza Tree. Mr. Skala asked if there had been input from the Police Department in terms of crime prevention through environmental design. Mr. Williams replied the Police Department had requested additional and improved lighting in the alleyways and this particular project would replace existing street lighting that was not functional for the most part at this time. Katie Essing, 11 S. Tenth Street, stated she was representing the Downtown CID, and noted the police had walked with them overnight last spring. She believed this was an important project in terms of increasing the safety and security of guests and the employees of the businesses that used the alleys. The location of the sconces at the Eighth Street and Cherry Street garage would be helpful for those using the alley behind the area as it was one of the heaviest used trash and recycling locations. She thought this would help in terms of overall safety and eliminate potential crimes and quality of life issues. B291-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
11

CONSENT AGENDA

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting

The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B281-15 B282-15 B283-15 B284-15 B285-15 B286-15 B288-15 B289-15 B290-15 B292-15 B293-15
B294-15 R164-15 R165-15 R166-15

Approving a major amendment to the Boone Hospital South Campus C-P Plan located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Nifong Boulevard.
Rezoning property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road from District C-1 to District O-P; approving the statement of intent.
Approving the O-P Plan of River Region Credit Union ­ West Broadway for property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road.
Appropriating funds for repairs to the art exhibit at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial at Battle Garden.
Authorizing construction of sanitary sewers in Sewer District No. 170 (Bethel Church Road/Poplar Hill Drive); calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 3.
Authorizing grant agreements with the Mid-Missouri Solid Waste Management District for the purchase of front-loading recycling containers and apartment recycling drop off bins; appropriating funds.
Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to industrial pretreatment requirements for the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to relocate a taxi stand on Tenth Street.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing an agreement with The Curators of the University of Missouri, on behalf of its Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, relating to emergency veterinary services for injured animals retrieved by animal control officers.
Accepting a donation from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Office of Sustainability for the Steps to Sustainability recognition program; appropriating funds.
Setting a public hearing: replacing existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting.
Transferring funds to the Youth Advisory Commission to allow for two members to attend the National League of Cities Conference ­ Youth Delegate Program.
Authorizing an agreement with the Stuart Parker Housing Development Group, LP, formerly the Housing Authority of the City of Columbia, for FY 2015 HOME funds for the renovation of housing units located at 207, 209 and 211 Hicks Drive; authorizing an amendment to a HOME agreement with the Housing Authority of the City of Columbia for the renovation of housing units located at 214A, 214B, 216A and 216B Unity Drive.

12

R167-15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Authorizing FY 2015 Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding agreements with Independent Living Center of Mid-Missouri, Inc., d/b/a Services for Independent Living, and Job Point.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS None.
INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all
were given first reading.

B295-15 B296-15
B297-15 B298-15 B299-15 B300-15 B302-15 B303-15 B304-15
B305-15

Amending Chapter 20 of the City Code as it relates to the schedule of fees for processing rezoning applications from any district to district R-1.
Approving the Final Plat of Barcus Ridge, Plat No. 2 located on the north side of Old Plank Road and southwest of the intersection of Route K and Old Plank Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations as it relates to direct driveway access on Old Plank Road subject to conditions.
Approving the Final Plat of Creeks Edge, Plat No. 3 located along Sawgrass Drive, west of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Vacating sewer and electric easements located on the northeast corner of Broadway and William Street (1601, 1605, 1701 and 1705 Broadway); accepting conveyances for sewer purposes.
Authorizing the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of an easement for the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63.
Authorizing a right of use permit with The Board of Trustees of Boone County Hospital to allow for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private irrigation system built in a portion of the Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard rights-of-way.
Appropriating funds for the Transit Service Analysis and Planning Assistance project.
Authorizing an Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreement Partial Performance Acknowledgement of Hinkson Creek Physical Habitat Assessment with the County of Boone and The Curators of the University of Missouri as it relates to the collaborative adaptive management implementation (CAM) process to address the total maximum daily load (TMDL) for Hinkson Creek.
Vacating a portion of a water utility easement adjacent to Lot 2 and Lot 3 within Horse Fair Subdivision located on the north side of Oakland Gravel Road.

13

B306-15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.

B307-15

Authorizing the replacement of existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B308-15

Authorizing a cooperative agreement with the Greenbelt Land Trust of Mid-Missouri for the FY 2016 implementation phase of the "Our Natural Legacy: A Plan for Columbia and Boone County" open space/green infrastructure project.

B309-15

Authorizing an agreement with Green Valley Rifle & Pistol Club, Inc. for range facility access and use by the Columbia Police Department for official scheduled training.

B310-15

Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for the Youth Leadership in Tobacco Prevention program; appropriating funds.

B311-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for HIV prevention; appropriating funds.

B312-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 2 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Eating Active Living in Local Communities program; appropriating funds.

B313-15

Amending Chapter 22 to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159 relating to residential refuse collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential refuse collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential roll cart refuse pick-up; to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159.1 relating to residential recycling collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential recycling collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential recycling roll cart pick-up.

B315-15

Calling a special election to consider an initiative ordinance requiring the existing residential refuse and recycling collector and rate systems be maintained, prohibiting roll carts for residential refuse and recycling collection, and prohibiting the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential refuse and recycling roll cart pick-up.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP101-15 Amendment to Section 29-130 (Parking) of the City Code as it Pertains to Fraternity and Sorority Houses.

Mr. Thomas asked if the fraternities and sororities were also looking for relief in the amount of parking they were required to provide or whether there was an alternative way to achieve the goal. Mr. Teddy replied he thought this was an alternative. He noted there had been a history of the Greek houses going to the Board of Adjustment for parking reductions. He stated he could produce that data for the benefit of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. He thought this particular applicant was acknowledging the requirements of the ordinance and only wanted the ability to meet the requirement off-site within a 500 foot radius. Mr. Thomas asked how much parking was required per the current ordinances. Mr. Teddy replied it was one-half the rated occupancy. Mr. Thomas understood that meant one space per every two beds. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct.
14

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Mr. Thomas made a motion to refer this issue along with the minimum parking issue to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
REP102-15 Certification of Initiative Petition ­ Prohibition of Residential Refuse and Recycling Roll Carts and Automated Refuse Collection.
Ms. Thompson explained two bills associated with the issue were introduced on tonight's agenda, and the next step would be for Council to consider those items. One bill would pass the initiative ordinance in the form in which it was presented, and the other bill would send the issue to the voters for approval or rejection. She pointed out the Council had removed B314-15, which had been in the packet, from the agenda and had introduced B31515, which was a new bill. The new bill clarified the petitioners were seeking a repeal and reenactment of the current provisions related to residential recycling and solid waste pick-up in addition to new amendments related to the prohibition of roll carts and automated collection vehicles for roll carts. She noted the next available election date for municipal purposes was March 15, 2016, which was the presidential preference primary election date.
Mayor McDavid understood this would be the date of the election even if the petitioners preferred the April, 2016 election due to the Charter language. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct, and noted this was specified in Section 132 of the City Charter.
Mr. Skala understood the Council would have two potential issues to consider, and asked if it was an either or situation. He wondered if they had to vote on both and whether one was contingent upon the other. Ms. Thompson replied if the Council chose not to adopt the language put forth in the petition, it was mandatory for them to submit the issue to the voters. Mr. Skala understood they had to weigh in on both issues. He asked if they could just send it to the voters without voting on the issue. Ms. Thompson replied no, and explained they would have to choose whether or not to adopt the language. If they chose not to adopt it, the effect was sending it to the voters. It mandated the vote to send it to the voters. She noted the item they were really considering was whether to adopt the ordinance in its current form as submitted.
REP103-15 Task Force on Community Violence Recommendation Status Update.
Ms. Nauser commented that she thought the community could be proud of this process, and noted it was important for the citizenry to ensure follow through from their government. She did not want the recommendations of the Task Force to sit on a shelf, and explained this report was a snapshot of where the community was today on some of the initiatives and recommendations. The report showed more needed to be done as many items were in their beginning stages. She pointed out the Task Force did not intend for everything to be solved by the City government as other agencies needed to be involved. She stated this needed to be a community effort, and encouraged the public to read the report and communicate with Council in that regard. She noted a community meeting would be held on October 28 to facilitate more dialogue, and invited the public to attend.
Mr. Trapp stated a lot of work had been put into this by a broad swath of the community and noted he was proud of the Task Force recommendations and report. It was
15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
based upon the consensus from a diverse group of stakeholders over a long period of time. He explained some of the goals were very specific and actionable, while others were intentionally very broad. Ending violence was something the City government was incapable of doing on its own. It would take everyone in the community to assist in addressing these issues. He commented that they had made some good steady progress, but still had more to do. He noted he had participated in the Chamber Leadership trip to Gainesville, Florida, and in many areas Columbia was holding its own or was superior to Gainesville, but Gainesville was leaps and bounds ahead of Columbia in terms of law enforcement and community policing. They had been proactively building relationships for a long time, and were actually attempting to address the disproportionate minority contact. He thought Columbia could look to them in terms of law enforcement. He noted Gainesville had been able to do this with existing resources, but their existing resources were about twice as much as Columbia's resources. He commented that he appreciated the Race Matters group for bringing forth these issues and for their support of the Task Force recommendations. In terms of community policing, he thought an attitudinal shift was underway, but in order to be proactive in relationship building, the police officers could not continue to go from call to call. He thought they as a community needed to find resources to have the kind of law enforcement they deserved. He pointed out the work on the Task Force was a nice preview to the Strategic Plan as its focus was broadened to social equity and racial justice beyond law enforcement. He hoped the public would attend the event on October 28 and asked staff to notify the former Task Force members of the meeting via e-mail as well. He noted they would discuss how the community wanted to be involved in the ongoing implementation and accountability efforts.
Mr. Thomas commented that he appreciated the work of community groups in pushing for the implementation of the Task Force recommendations as it was important to follow through with those actions in a transparent manner. He hoped this information would be placed on the website similar to that of the Comprehensive Plan recommendations so the public could see the status on a regular basis. He stated he thought community policing was important, and agreed Gainesville had a proactive approach to reducing crime. He noted one program in Gainesville involved a monthly event where youth in different neighborhoods were invited to have dinner and spend an evening talking to an officer on various discussion topics. The people that had presented the information had been extremely passionate and excited about the benefits of this approach. He commented that clear instructions had been given to officers to avoid arrests in situations where it might not be warranted even if it was an eligible response for the officers. They were to look at alternative ways to de-escalate a situation to keep juveniles, in particular, out of the criminal justice system. He stated he was happy the Task Force recommendations had a high profile, and noted the meeting on October 28 would allow them to create time lines for some of the actions.
Mr. Skala stated he was appreciative of all of the work that had gone into this, and agreed with Mr. Thomas in the creation of a dashboard in terms of progress. He commented that he was glad some of them had gone to Gainesville and had gathered some information on this topic because he had wanted to share information he had brought back from Orlando, Florida. He noted he had been invited to participate in the National League of Cities Racial
16

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Equality and Leadership group, and it dovetailed nicely into this. He suggested time be provided for the Council to inform each other and discuss issues in terms of community policing and the misunderstanding people had about community policing within the community and the Police Department.
Ms. Nauser suggested the final report of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence be placed on the same webpage as the dashboard associated with the recommendations as it was currently difficult to find that information. She also thought this should be made prominent on the website.
REP104-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, commented that the petitioners were not in agreement as to which election was preferred, but noted they all agreed they wanted it to be placed on the ballot for the election in which the costs were the least. He also asked for clarification with regard to the next actions of the Council. Ms. Thompson explained the Council would consider two bills at their next meeting. One bill would enact the ordinance as presented and the other would submit the issue to the voters. If Council decided to not enact the ordinance as presented, it would go to the vote of the people. Mr. Shanker stated he thought the language still needed to be agreed upon. Ms. Thompson replied no, and explained the ballot language was included in the bill that would send the issue to the voters. She pointed out the City Charter called for the issue to go to the next available election for municipal election purposes, so they did not have a choice in that regard.
Mr. Ruffin explained the Columbia Alliance to Combat Homelessness (CATCH) was a community-based group that had grown out of the Room at the Inn initiative and had the vision of building a comprehensive, year-round shelter for the homeless. He noted this group had been in partnership with the City to build a facility on Eighth Street. He stated they had met with the North Central Columbia Neighborhood Association (NCCNA) and the Ridgeway Neighborhood Association on October 6, and the residents were in favor of the vision to build a comprehensive homeless shelter. The residents, however, did not feel it should be built in a residential neighborhood, and, in particular, in their residential neighborhood. They were concerned about public safety and other impacts which they already dealt with in their neighborhoods due to the services for the homeless presently located there. He commented that CATCH had met with the residents a second time to clarify concerns, and he believed the concerns of the residents were legitimate. In this process, they had discovered the proposed property was likely too small to build a facility to meet all of the needs that were appropriate for a center of this nature. As a result, CATCH had decided to maintain their commitment to building a facility, but to pull back from building it at that location. In addition, the tentative plans for the facility were on hold until further notice.
Mr. Ruffin commented the Columbia Housing Authority and the Central Missouri Opportunity Council, which was a newly formed organization consisting of citizens that were
17

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
focused on the development of minority and women owned companies in order to create more opportunities in terms of contractual work and new jobs, would hold a kick-off meeting on Monday, October 26 at Oak Towers at 5:00 p.m. The focus would be on networking in terms of discussing the issues and expanding opportunities.
Mayor McDavid asked if Regional Economic Development Inc. (REDI) had been invited. Mr. Ruffin replied yes. Mayor McDavid noted REDI had discussed similar initiatives in the recent past so he hoped they would attend.
Ms. Nauser stated she had been contacted by a couple of people who worked in the downtown area with regard to skateboarders that did not abide by any pedestrian or vehicular traffic rules and were darting out into the street on their skateboards from alleys, etc. She wondered if the downtown units could keep an eye out for this dangerous behavior.
Ms. Nauser commented that the adopt-a-spot at the roundabout on State Farm Parkway included very tall decorative grass, which made it difficult to see someone crossing at that roundabout that was small in stature from a few cars back. She was concerned about the safety of children and other people, and asked staff to look into this issue to ensure it did not inhibit motorists from seeing pedestrians walking through the crosswalk.
Mr. Thomas thanked Mr. Parker for his analysis on how the Council could meet the goals of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) through a combination of energy efficiency and renewable energy. He also thanked the other three individuals that had spoken on the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence and the racial divide in Columbia. He was happy this conversation was continuing to happen and that the University of Missouri administration was responding to some of the calls on campus with regard to this issue. He stated he was not sure anyone knew all of the right paths, but noted he was glad they were having an open dialogue.
Mr. Thomas passed around a copy of the Gainesville bus time table and noted it was dependent on student fees of $9 per credit hour, which was higher than the nearby communities they had previously visited. There were 70,000 students in Gainesville, and all paid about $200-$220 per year for free bus travel throughout the community. In addition, about 33,000 employees also had free bus passes through a program the transit system had with any employer that wished to purchase bus passes for the entire work force. It was a rate of $7.50 per month times the number of employees the employer had. The system had 11 million rides per year, and their buses were clean and plentiful. The campus routes were very well used. In addition to the campus routes, there were about 30 community routes. He noted the size of the community was not much larger than Columbia. He pointed out Gary Ward from the University of Missouri had been on the trip, so he was able to see the system. He did not believe the University of Missouri understood the benefits this type of transit system would bring to the University as well as the City of Columbia and its residents, but thought they should continue to make the case to reach that goal.
Mr. Skala commented that he had brought back a flash drive from the meeting in Orlando, Florida he had participated in, which contained a presentation by the Mayor of
18

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Orlando with regard to minority contracting for public facilities. He understood it had been a city-county coordinated effort, and stated he would share it with the rest of the Council.
Mr. Skala asked City staff to place speed trailers on Kelsey Drive near its intersection with Lake of the Woods Road to slow down people who were traveling on that road.
Mr. Skala asked City staff to look at whether traffic calming was needed near the intersection of Rice Road and Shamrock Drive, or to restrict parking to only one side of the street. He wanted staff to look at how it could be a safer intersection as it was narrow with a 35 mph speed limit.
The meeting adjourned at 8:59 p.m. Respectfully submitted, Sheela Amin City Clerk
19

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI SEPTEMBER 8, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Tuesday, September 8, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS and NAUSER were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meeting of August 17, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Ms. Nauser.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Mr. Thomas asked that PR136-15 and B245-15 be moved from the consent agenda to old business.
The agenda, including the consent agenda with PR136-15 and B245-15 being moved to old business, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Thomas and a second by Mr. Skala.
SPECIAL ITEMS
None.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
None.
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Tyree Byndom - CPOA and Dale Roberts, update on the Andersen report for CPD and the task force on community violence report, and demands of the Columbia Egalitarian Cooperative.
Mr. Byndom was not in attendance.
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp - Diversity, Inclusion and the Police, and follow up on the Community Violence Final Report and budget implications.
Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, explained she was representing a group called Race Matters and noted they were interested in the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence and the goals of the Strategic Plan. She stated they felt a cultural shift within the Police Department and with the Council in terms of how people were engaged and remarks made by Council were needed. She thought city-wide community engagement along with a re-engineering of the economic development policy, which she referred to as plantation politics, was also needed. She believed policies were made for those that had versus those with needs, and gave subsidies to IBM and people
1

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
utilizing public transit having to stand along busy roads without a bench or shelter as examples. She noted some referred to this as institutional racism because they tended to forget those that were poor, of color, or underserved. She felt policies for those people needed to come first, and pointed out many people did not understand what it was like to be a person of color. She explained she had provided the Council The Case for Reparations by Te-Nehisi Coates and The Color of Fear so they understood how she felt about the issues. She noted Race Matters and Bethel Church were trying to have a different type of engagement with the Police Department as they wanted to learn of their concerns as well. She believed financing for police should be included in infrastructure and was a priority, so she was not supportive of a sales tax, which she felt was regressive and unfair. She was happy the Police Department would be working with the Department of Justice on community policing and wanted to deconstruct the idea that police staffing and community policing were the same as community policing was a philosophy about how they treated and worked with citizens. She believed the public was being blamed for not supporting the police ballot measure, but thought it did not pass because it had not been earned. She suggested they re-engineer how they communicated with the public if they wanted support from the community.
Steve Bennett - Update on Mediacom broadband services in Columbia and Boone County.
Mr. Bennett stated he was the Director of Operations for Mediacom and explained they had been working on expanding their telecommunications network in order to provide more services. He pointed out they had established and tested a one-gigabyte high-speed data network across the entire footprint of Columbia, and this service would be available on September 15, 2015 to any customer that was along Mediacom's communication network. He stated this service would be provided in Columbia, Holt Summit, and Jefferson City, and wanted the Council to be aware of it. He noted they were proud of this accomplishment as they understood high-speed networks were key to communities in terms of attracting development, employees, and residents. He provided a handout of the press release issued on the subject.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B220-15 Adopting the FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B221-15 Amending Chapter 6 of the City Code as it relates to trade permit fees. B222-15 Amending Chapter 12A of the City Code as it relates to stormwater utility charges. B223-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code as it relates to parking fees for unmetered off-street municipal parking lots and facilities and parking meter hoods. B224-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to solid waste rates and services. B225-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to sanitary sewer utility connection fees.
Item A was read by the Clerk, and B220-15, B221-15, B222-15, B223-15, B224-15, and B225-15 were given third reading by the Clerk.
Mr. Matthes provided a staff report.
2

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala understood there had been discussion with regard to focusing Strategic Plan efforts on three pilot areas, and asked for clarification. Mr. Matthes replied this was the first time they had discussed social equity as a City government in terms of the focus of the Strategic Plan, and explained they thought they should pick three areas based upon data in terms of crime, household income, age of housing, affordability of housing, etc. to determine where they might receive a maximum return on any investment.
Mr. Skala understood the Community Relations Director would be involved with the call center. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and explained that position would be Director of that service.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Steve Hirt, 2912 Shingo Court, commented that it had been stated at the previous Council Meeting that Columbia was at a 30 year low for violent crime, but that was a comparison of the calendar year to prior years. When looking at the last twelve months, August through July, violent crime was up 69 percent and fire arm crime was up 93 percent, which he believed to be significant. He was not sure if Mr. Matthes had not been provided this information or if Mr. Matthes had chosen not to present it. He reiterated he felt those numbers were significant. He commented that he assumed he lived in a safe neighborhood, but 6-7 years ago a bullet had gone through the garage and interior wall of his home, and only five feet from his recliner. He thought the Council needed to review the priorities in the budget. He understood money had been set aside to add three police officers, but suggested money be found for more officers as he was concerned with the current crime trends. Katie Essing, 11 S. Tenth Street, explained she was the Executive Director of the Downtown Community Improvement District (CID) and commented that they had a shared goal of making parking in the downtown easier. She noted the CID Board would provide feedback to the Council with regard to the proposed parking fee increases prior to the Council voting on that item. There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid continued the public hearing to the September 21, 2015 Council Meeting. Mayor McDavid explained there were some real challenges to the general fund, which was the fund that operated the public safety portion of the City's mission, as it was not keeping up with the cost of living and the population growth. In constant dollars per capita, it was down 12 percent during the last ten years, and the City had cut 22 police officers and 15 firefighters when one considered the number of police officers and firefighters in 2005 multiplied by the population increase. He was pleased seven additional public safety officers would be funded in the budget due to prudent financial management, even though the general fund was not expected to grow in the next year. He stated Columbia did not have enough money to adequately fund firefighters or police officers or to maintain streets even though citizens clearly placed public safety and streets as the top two priorities every time they were asked. He reiterated the general fund was not keeping up with population growth and inflation, and noted he planned to propose two amendments to the amendment sheet at the next Council Meeting in order to add $150,000 to the Police Department budget for community policing. He pointed out police officers per capita was 30 percent below that of comparable cities, and citizen satisfaction with the Columbia Police Department remained
3

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
unacceptably low. He planned to propose providing the Columbia Police Department $100,000 in surplus funds that had been suggested for strategic planning and $50,000 from CAT-TV so the $150,000 was used for community policing. He commented that in his opinion funding for CAT-TV should be vetted and managed by the Commission on Cultural Affairs. He explained CAT-TV had been provided subsidies of $1.5 million over the years, and noted he had never seen a budget, pro-forma, balance sheet, or performance metrics from CAT-TV so he had no information regarding the number of people that watched it.
Mayor McDavid understood B225-15 would increase sewer connection fees, and noted he planned to vote against it. He did not believe there was any justification for Columbia to charge dramatically more than other Missouri cities for sewer connection fees. He felt the off-site analysis supporting the increase was flagrantly incorrect. He commented that homeowners would face an increased cost burden and it would lead to a difficult regulatory environment in Columbia, and believed these policies would drive first time homeowners to adjacent communities. He noted a new subdivision was being developed in Hallsville, and Ashland was growing three times as fast as Columbia. He did not believe this was a coincidence as he thought they had advocated policies that restricted home building in Columbia and drove affordable homes to adjacent communities. He thought it was ironic the City was planning to host a conference on affordable housing while simultaneously escalating the cost of homeownership. He reiterated he believed this increase in sewer utility connection fees was unnecessarily harmful to first time home buyers, and stated he would vote against it.
Mr. Skala commented that public safety was a priority for citizens, and noted the potential solution offered in November had been unsuccessful. He understood Mr. Hirt had indicated violent crime trends were rising, and asked staff for additional information so they were able to reconcile the numbers as he had thought those trends were down. He agreed they should continue to devote additional resources to public safety as those resources were found, and stated he was happy they were able to fund seven new public safety employees in the FY 2016 budget.
Mr. Skala noted he disagreed with Mayor McDavid in terms of the proposed increase in sewer connection fees and the statement indicating they were driving development out of Columbia. He thought they needed to consider the cost of service and the three-year plan that had been agreed to by the Council for connection fees as it had been a compromised and reasonable approach.
Mr. Thomas stated he supported the incremental increase in the sewer connection fee and believed it was justified as it cost $300,000-$350,000 per house to expand the sewer system to accommodate a new house in terms of pipes, capacity, staff to manage the system, etc. He noted the consultant, Burton and Associates, had recommended the connection fee increase per new house over five or six years, and this was the second of those increases. He thought it was invalid to indicate this would make it harder for lowincome families to afford homes as there were a lot of low-income families that were currently paying more in sewer fees to subsidize new homes, which were rarely purchased by lowincome homeowners. The unfair burden of paying for new public infrastructure for new residents was a large reason it was hard to own a home and live in Columbia.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Thomas noted he was interested in the proposal to fund an additional police officer with the $100,000 they had planned to use for general strategic plan initiatives, but pointed out he would not support defunding CAT-TV. He commented that CAT-TV was part of a three-pronged communication strategy, which involved education, government, and the public, and the public portion, which was not controlled by an institution, was CAT-TV. Since it was not controlled by an institution, it struggled to fund itself. He noted funding by the City had been paired down over the years from $200,000 per year to $50,000 per year, and CATTV had created revenue streams to replace the loss in funding. He stated he had seen CATTV budgets and balance sheets, and reiterated he would support maintaining the $50,000 for CAT-TV as previously agreed upon.
Ms. Nauser understood the $100,000 in surplus funds Mayor McDavid was proposing to provide the Police Department for community policing would go towards overtime and other expenses, but not toward the cost of a new police officer since it was one-time funding. Mayor McDavid stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser commented that a couple of years ago, they had agreed they would stop funding CAT-TV, but had since continued to fund it, so she would support that proposed amendment by Mayor McDavid. She stated she would also support an increase in sewer connection fees, but noted she would not support an increase that would make the fee greater than the fee charged by Boone County, which she believed was $1,200. She did not feel Columbia should have the highest connection fee in the State of Missouri.
Mr. Trapp reiterated the point of Ms. Nauser in that the strategic plan implementation funds were one-time funds so they would not be able to hire an additional police officer. He thought police overtime would fall under the general rubric of strategic plan implementation, and felt it might be better left general so it did not create further confusion between one-time funds and budgetary funds. He noted CAT-TV funding had decreased from $200,000 to $100,000 to $50,000, and funding this year would come from council reserve funds. He commented that CAT-TV had come a long way in terms of carrying their own freight, and believed it was appropriate to fund them with council reserve funds this year because they were an important community institution. He pointed out Columbia did things other communities did not, such as Percent for Art, which made it special, and that sense of place was an economic driver. He reiterated a modest investment of one-time funds was appropriate to help CAT-TV on their path toward fiscal independence.
Mayor McDavid reiterate discussion on the budget would continue to the September 21, 2015 Council Meeting.
(B) Construction of a sidewalk along the north side of Clark Lane between Paris Road (Route B) and east of the U.S. Highway 63 Connector, construction of a trail connection on the west side of the Clark Lane bridge continuing south under Clark Lane and Interstate 70 and connecting to the east side of Mehl Road, and reconstruction of driveways to meet ADA requirements, more specifically described as the Clark Lane West Sidewalk and Hinkson Creek Trail Connection project.
Item B was read by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing.
5

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Annette Triplett, 201 W. Broadway, stated she was the Executive Director of the PedNet Coalition and noted they supported this project wholeheartedly as it would make it easier for people to walk, bike, and use wheelchairs in the area. It would also provide critical connectivity to the future Hinkson Creek Trail. She commented that in general the Third Ward was lacking facilities for those walking, biking, and using wheelchairs, and this project would improve safety and connectivity. She reiterated their support for the project.
Mary Hussmann, 210 Ridgeway Avenue, commented that she supported this project as sidewalks were needed, and only wished a trail would have been included on the west side so sidewalks on that side would have been a part of the project as well.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Skala explained this project was a connector under I-70 to the northeast, and connected with The Links golf course and the Indian Hills subdivision. He was pleased they had made improvements on Clark Lane and agreed the sidewalk on the west side of Clark Lane was sorely needed, but there was simply no room for a trail on that side due to I-70 at this time. He noted he would endorse this project. Mr. Thomas stated he also supported this project as it overcame many barriers in the area in terms of I-70 and Highway 63 and would connect with other components increasing the opportunity for people to walk, bike, or use a wheelchair. He thought it was a good example of social equity because people living in this area had not been given an equal opportunity to move around their neighborhood or area if they did not have a car. He understood 30 percent of Americans did not drive a car, which included the young, old, those with disabilities, or those with low-income, and those people had difficulty even getting to the bus stop in this area since the roads were narrow with no place to walk. He reiterated it was a great project that would be funded with non-motorized transportation pilot project money, which was specifically authorized by Congress in 2005 in order to make these kinds of connections and improve access for those that did not travel by car. Mr. Trapp commented that he had walked this area a number of times, and there was hardly a place in Columbia that needed sidewalks more than this area as there were poor sight lines, speeding traffic, and no berm. This project would also provide another safe way to cross the highway, which was very much needed. He thought this was a great project and noted he was happy to see it moving forward. Mr. Skala made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the Clark Lane West Sidewalk and Hinkson Creek Trail Connection project. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
OLD BUSINESS
PR136-15 Establishing a revised policy relating to the repair, maintenance and restoration of brick paved streets in the City of Columbia.
The policy resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas recalled the original policy resolution being quite controversial, and asked if the Disabilities Commission had been provided the opportunity to review these amendments. He suggested it be tabled if that had not occurred. Mr. Teddy replied he
6

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
thought the Disabilities Commission was aware of these changes, but was not sure if they had dedicated any time to it.
Ms. Peters understood this was the same policy the Disabilities Commission had agreed to except that three more streets would be added. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and explained the standards that would apply to a private contractor would mirror the standards that would apply to a city contractor or forces and that thought the outcome was the same with only a broadening of it.
Mr. Skala noted Section 4(i) indicated a percentage of property owners living on a portion of at least one block of a street would be established, and asked if that would be a part of a future ordinance change. Mr. Teddy replied it was a placeholder, and Council would determine that percentage in future legislation if it was not within the policy resolution. Mr. Skala understood that legislation had yet to be brought forward.
Mr. Thomas made a motion to table PR136-15 to the November 2, 2015 Council Meeting and to direct the Disabilities Commission to review the policy resolution changes and provide feedback. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
B238-15 Approving the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 located on the northwest corner of Strawn Road (Route ZZ) and West Broadway; authorizing a performance contract; granting variances from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction and direct driveway access; setting forth conditions for approval.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mayor McDavid understood there was a request for this item to be tabled. Mr. Trapp stated that was correct. He explained he had been in conversations with the legal representative and civil engineer of this project, and had agreed to request this item be tabled to the next meeting to allow time for them to meet with the Public Works Department staff to work out some driveway easement issues. Mr. Trapp made a motion to table B238-15 to the September 21, 2015 Council Meeting. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote.
B239-15 Approving the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision, a Replat of Lot 11 and part of Lot 10 of R.B. Price's Subdivision, located on the east side of Melbourne Street and the north side of Windsor Street (204 Melbourne Street and 1403 Windsor Street); granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser understood that if this property were to be redeveloped, it would be redeveloped as an R-3 zoned property, and asked if they had any assurances a sidewalk would be built at that time. She agreed it did not make sense to require a sidewalk today, but felt it might be needed in the future if the structure were demolished and rebuilt. Mr. Teddy replied a condition would need to be added to the ordinance requiring it. He noted he could envision a possible regrading of the site on a larger scale that might allow a sidewalk to be included as part of the building plan.
7

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Thomas thought the City had a general rule requiring developers to construct sidewalks or request variances for the redevelopment of any property that did not have a sidewalk along its frontage at the time. Mr. Teddy explained a variance would be granted in this situation if Council approved the ordinance as written. Mr. Thomas understood this variance would carry through to future situations. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct.
Mr. Thomas commented that he would want to preserve the ability to obtain a payment in lieu of the sidewalk in the future if a district-wide sidewalk policy was established so the money could be used for a sidewalk in the vicinity. He stated he also agreed with Ms. Nauser in terms of wanting the ability to require a sidewalk in the future when a new building was constructed. He noted he would be interested in adding a condition to the sidewalk variance.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, understood a four-foot sidewalk, curb and gutter, and a retaining wall would be required, which would put that retaining wall at the front step. He suggested a sidewalk not be required in this situation.
Ms. Thompson commented that if the Council wanted to add a condition, she would suggest Section 3 read "Based on existing conditions, subdivider is granted a variance from the requirements of Section 25-48.1 of the Subdivision Regulations so that a sidewalk shall not be required to be constructed along a portion of the east side of Melbourne Street adjacent to Lot 1 within the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision (204 Melbourne Street); provided however, if a new structure is constructed on such lot, a sidewalk shall be designed and constructed at the time of construction of the new structure."
Mr. Thomas asked if they should condition it upon when a building permit was requested in case it was an expansion of an existing building. Ms. Thompson replied a building permit would be required for new construction. She noted the developer could come to Council to seek another variance or the removal of the condition in the future if they felt a sidewalk could still not be constructed when there was new construction.
Mr. Thomas asked if a payment in lieu of could be required if at that time they had a district concept in place for sidewalks. Ms. Thompson replied she could not respond to that question at this time since she did not know what that program would involve.
Mr. Thomas asked if the wording suggested by Ms. Thompson covered any situation where a building permit was requested. Ms. Thompson replied that was correct if a new structure was constructed on the lot. Mr. Thomas asked about an extension to an existing building. He wondered if that was considered a new structure on the lot. Ms. Thompson replied that would be new construction, but not a new structure, and asked which scenario the Council wanted the amendment to address. Mr. Thomas stated he thought an extension or new construction would trigger a sidewalk. Ms. Thompson replied the act of subdividing and platting was what typically triggered a review of whether a sidewalk was necessary. Mr. Teddy explained that if this was a vacant lot without any variance of record with regard to a sidewalk, staff would require the sidewalk to be built with the building. In this situation, if a variance were granted, it would apply to the existing structure and alterations to the existing structure. Ms. Thompson asked if Council wanted the amendment to address the expansion of an existing building or just a new structure. Mr. Thomas replied he wanted to be consistent with other comparable situations. Ms. Thompson stated she was not sure there was a comparable situation.
8

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser understood any new building construction would have to be placed further back on the lot because the existing layout did not meet current setback requirements. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser believed there would be enough room to build the sidewalk if the existing building were razed for a new three-plex. She wondered if they could even add on to the existing structure since it was non-conforming. Mr. Teddy replied they could not add on to it, but they could remodel it. Ms. Nauser understood they could not add two units to the existing building, and noted she was viewing the need for a sidewalk in the situation the structure was demolished and another structure was constructed.
Mr. Thomas made a motion to amend B239-15 by changing Section 3 so it read "Based on existing conditions, subdivider is granted a variance from the requirements of Section 25-48.1 of the Subdivision Regulations so that a sidewalk shall not be required to be constructed along a portion of the east side of Melbourne Street adjacent to Lot 1 within the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision (204 Melbourne Street); provided however, if a new structure is constructed on such lot, a sidewalk shall be designed and constructed at the time of construction of the new structure." The motion was seconded by Ms. Peters.
Mr. Skala stated he thought it was reasonable to amend this to require sidewalks if a new structure was constructed on the lot.
The motion made by Mr. Thomas and seconded by Ms. Peters to amend B239-15 by changing Section 3 so it read "Based on existing conditions, subdivider is granted a variance from the requirements of Section 25-48.1 of the Subdivision Regulations so that a sidewalk shall not be required to be constructed along a portion of the east side of Melbourne Street adjacent to Lot 1 within the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision (204 Melbourne Street); provided however, if a new structure is constructed on such lot, a sidewalk shall be designed and constructed at the time of construction of the new structure" was approved unanimously by voice vote.
Mr. Skala stated he was happy to support this amended ordinance. He explained the fourth building to the right of this was a rather larger R-3 building, and an intent to build another building behind it created controversy in terms of whether Liberty Street was a street or an alley. It was determined to be an alley, which meant the parking lot would not need to be enlarged and the property would not conform to the overlay in the Benton Stephens neighborhood. He believed this reconfiguration was an attempt to ensure the preservation of the overlay and to make it amenable to some of the existing affordable homes in the area without the development pressures of student housing. He reiterated he was happy to see this reconfiguration.
B239-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B242-15 Authorizing construction of a solid waste administration and collection operations facilities building at the Columbia Sanitary Landfill; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division; appropriating funds.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report.
9

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Deanna Walkenbach, 407 Pyranees Drive, commented that they were told during the ward meetings that were held regarding roll carts that the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) might not approve any more land to be used in the landfill, and asked if anything had been approved or if approval was still up in the air. Mr. Glascock replied the City had 6-7 years of life left in the landfill, and staff believed permitting would be granted since there were only 14 landfills in the State of Missouri, but it had not been permitted at this time. Ms. Walkenbach explained she wanted to make that point since it might be a problem.
B242-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B245-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to revise the speed limit on portions of Providence Road and State Route K.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Glascock provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood the speed limit was 35 mph on north Providence Road and asked for the rationale in setting that speed limit in the past. Mr. Glascock replied that had been a new road so they had set it to be the same as the other portion of the road to the north. Today, there was not much to slow people down on that road except for the stop sign at Blue Ridge Road and a street light at Vandiver Drive so people were traveling faster. He noted they did not want pedestrians to feel vehicles were traveling at 35 miles per hour when they were not, which was another reason they were suggesting it be raised to 45 mph. Mr. Thomas asked if it was 35 mph to the north. Mr. Glascock replied he thought it was. Mr. Thomas asked if the perception was that people were closer to adhering to the speed limit further north. Mr. Glascock replied yes, and explained there was congestion in that area due to a subdivision that fed on to that roadway. Mr. Thomas understood this was how speed limits were determined in that the speed of traffic was measured and the speed limit was then set to suit those speeds, and noted he felt there needed to be a different approach. He thought they should decide how fast traffic should go and then influence the parameters of the road in terms of lane width, sight lines, medians, etc. Mr. Glascock pointed out they wanted people to travel on the major roads, and did not want people to cut through subdivisions. Mr. Thomas stated that made sense, but thought they could leave the speed limit as it was and redesign the road with some traffic calming effects. Mr. Thomas understood MoDOT had recommended the speed limit be reduced on Route K, and asked if the City had the speed study numbers from MoDOT. Mr. Glascock replied he did not, and explained MoDOT had conducted the speed study and had only provided a letter requesting the reduction in the speed limit. Mr. Thomas stated he would like to see a copy of the study as he wanted to understand their thinking process. Mr. Glascock explained shoulders had been added to the narrow road, which people bicycled on, and subdivisions had been added to the area creating more congestion and vehicles. Mr. Thomas wondered if anything would be accomplished by changing the speed limit from 45 mph to 35 mph. Mr. Glascock stated he assumed MoDOT had some crash history and had
10

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
reviewed the number of access points. He understood they had also mentioned actual vehicle speed, which he assumed meant they were going off the 85th percentile in terms of speed. Mr. Thomas asked to see the data.
Ms. Nauser stated she wanted to see the data also as she drove that road almost daily and believed most cars drove faster than 35 mph. She wondered how they would inform drivers of the speed limit change if this was approved as it was a fairly drastic reduction in the speed limit. Mr. Glascock stated he would ask MoDOT what they planned to do. He pointed out if the Council approved this ordinance tonight, it would go into effect quickly. Ms. Nauser reiterated she would like to see the data.
Ms. Nauser made a motion to table B245-15 to the October 5, 2015 Council Meeting. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
B249-15 Authorizing an easement release agreement with Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. and the Mary M. Hackett Trust No. 1 relating to the vacation of sewer easements located on the southeast corner of Providence Road and Broadway conditioned upon construction of new sewer facilities within public rights-of-way and surface parking areas.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser asked when the first time was that this issue had been brought before the Council. Mr. Teddy replied he did not recall, but thought it had been a while ago. Ms. Nauser thought the previous sewer easement ordinance had been defeated about six months ago. Ms. Thompson stated the sewer easement agreement had been defeated on April 6, 2015. She understood the plat had been approved on February 3, 2014, and thought the other plans had been presented around that time. Ms. Nauser understood the C-2 zoning had been amended in August, 2014. Ms. Nauser commented that the rendering made it seem as though the entire building except for one end was two stories, and asked for clarification. Mr. Teddy replied there was a two part height requirement. He explained the building had to be at least 24 feet, which it was in all locations. The building also had to be at least two stories, which it was not since there was a mezzanine on the east side of the building and it was a large open floor elsewhere in the building. Ms. Nauser thought the requirement was that the building height had to be two stories, but not that both stories had to be usable. Mr. Teddy commented that staff needed to know if it was not the intent of Council for the second story to equal the floor below as they would run into this situation in the future since this applied to all C-2 developments. Without direction from Council, staff did not want to pronounce this to be a two-story building. Mr. Matthes stated staff would love for Council to interpret this from a policy perspective. He explained the issue before Council was the sewer easement, but noted a building permit would not be issued based on these plans and the interpretation of the existing ordinance. Mr. Ruffin understood there was not any language in the C-2 zoning code that would clarify the percentage of the building that would have to be constructed to be considered a second story. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and read the language from the Code of Ordinances, which indicated buildings shall have a minimum of two stories consisting of a
11

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
minimum of 24 feet. Mr. Ruffin asked how staff had come to the conclusion that the mezzanine did not qualify as a second story. Mr. Teddy replied there was not a definition of story in the zoning code, so they looked at the definitions of story and mezzanine in the International Building Code, which was the building code that would apply to this structure. Mezzanine was defined as an intermediate level or levels between the floor and ceiling of any story in accordance to some regulations, which indicated a mezzanine was not greater than one-third of the floor area of the room or space in which the mezzanine was located. The proposal by CVS included only about 15 percent of the floor below so it was far short of the 33 percent. He pointed out mezzanines were normally thought of as an open space, but there were exceptions to openness. If there were two or more means of egress from the space, it could be enclosed. The proposal by CVS included an enclosed area designed for a break room, two offices, and a storage area, which had a direct exit to the outside of the building. He commented that their interpretation was judgement-based, and Council could say it was good enough if the profile of the building appeared to be two stories or Council could say it had to be larger than 33 percent or something else. It was not defined as part of the zoning amendment.
Ms. Thompson commented that Council could give additional direction to staff on the interpretation of the two-story height in terms of C-2 zoning, but pointed out this issue before them was the release of a sewer easement that would enable them to construct this particular structure at this location. It was within the discretionary authority of the Council to determine whether or not they wanted to release the sewer easement. It was not mandated or required just because it was in front of them in the form of a sewer release agreement. She reiterated the Council was not under legal obligation to release the sewer easement.
Mr. Ruffin asked if CVS would have the authority to proceed with the building if the release of the sewer easement was approved, and whether they would have to come back before the Council again. Ms. Thompson replied they would not have to come back to the Council again, but they would have to request a building permit from staff. Discussion would then ensue as to whether the second story was in compliance with the building code and whether the building permit would be required to be issued.
Mr. Skala commented that his intent with the amendments to C-2 zoning was to establish mixed-use as a priority for second story buildings. He thought the amendments also required an access on Providence Road and certain other streets, and an elevator, etc., and asked for clarification. Mr. Teddy replied it did not refer to elevators, but there was a requirement for a functional exit and entry door to the street. He noted the CVS proposal had doors facing Broadway and the parking lot, which was south of the building, and there was a corridor that connected the two entrances. This would meet the Code requirement even though there had been some public comment with regard to it. Mr. Skala understood the street side first floor space had to include an entrance to either Broadway or Ninth Street, and might include a separate doorway, entry spaces, and stair or elevator shafts that provided access to dwelling units on an upper floor level or behind non-residential building spaces. He stated he also thought it was highly irregular to put building elevations in a sewer vacation easement agreement. Ms. Thompson replied not necessarily. She explained the applicant was asking the Council to do something special, so in return the Council had the ability to
12

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
look at what they wanted for the property and whether it was a project for which they would be willing to release the sewer easement. She noted the City's problems with downtown sewers had been well documented over the course of the last two years, and the Council needed to be comfortable that the right they would give up to construct sewers at that location were warranted since it would interrupt an existing sewer easement. Mr. Matthes pointed out one issue had been that the sewer would be under what would be constructed, and that would have created a huge liability for the City. He understood CVS had accommodated the request for the new sewer to go around the building, which was why the issue was again before Council, but noted there were still other concerns with regard to the project.
Mr. Skala asked if the Council would not be a participant of future discussion and study of the actual building plan beyond the elevations associated with this agreement. Mr. Matthes replied current ordinances would rule, so it would be a staff decision with regard to whether to grant the building permit once this easement was released. Mr. Skala understood it would not come to Council. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and noted the building permit would be issued if the applicant complied with the ordinances as interpreted by staff. Mr. Skala commented that the Council did not know what was really inside other than what staff had indicated. Mr. Matthes explained staff currently did not feel the proposed building would meet the building codes and ordinances so a permit would not be granted. Ms. Nauser understood that was based upon the definition of a story. Mr. Matthes stated this was considered a mezzanine per the building code. Ms. Nauser commented that the building was technically two stories tall and believed staff was being too restrictive with regard to whether a story was a floor or a mezzanine. Mr. Matthes noted that was the reason staff was open for clarification from the Council.
Ms. Nauser understood the elevations, etc. were provided because of the sewer easement, and typically plans were not provided to Council. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and explained that argument would have occurred at the administrative level.
Mr. Trapp asked if there had been public comment when the Council was considering amendments to the C-2 zoning with regard to the definition of a second floor. Mr. Teddy replied he thought it had come up toward the end of the process. He believed there had been public comment that there should be a minimum, but it had not been included in the draft that had been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. Mr. Trapp recalled it being an amendment after public comment was taken and had occurred at about 12:30 a.m.
Ms. Peters asked if the intention was known when the C-2 zoning ordinances had been amended by Council. She wondered if the intention had been for two functional floors. Mr. Thomas replied he was under the impression that they were discussing two floors of usable space because it would create the possibility for mixed-use buildings, which he believed relieved pressures on public infrastructure systems. He felt it would also increase the value of the space, number of jobs, number of residents, the amount of property tax generated, the amount of sales tax generated, etc. He believed that would make for a vibrant and successful downtown district.
Mayor McDavid asked how much money the City was spending for the services of Clarion. Mr. Teddy replied the contract had a not to exceed amount of $150,000. Mayor
13

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
McDavid understood the City was spending $150,000 to produce a form-based zoning code for downtown, and stated he did not doubt they would accept it since there was enthusiasm with hiring them. He noted that meant physical form would be considered over the use of the property for zoning decisions. He commented that the CVS proposal had the look of a twostory building in his opinion. Mr. Teddy agreed the profile of the building was at a two-story height. Mr. Matthes explained that was the reason clarification by Council would be appreciated.
Mr. Skala agreed the City had spent a lot of money on Clarion, but pointed out they had not voted on what Clarion had recommended, and some items could be tweaked. The current zoning code was what they had as the law at this time, and the intent of the amendments to the C-2 zoning code was to establish mixed-use facilities. He noted he agreed the proposed building was 24 feet tall, but he also agreed with staff in that it was not a two-story building with the second level being a mezzanine.
Robert Hollis, 1103 E. Broadway, provided a handout and explained he was an attorney representing CVS, and commented that he believed this was an atypical situation. He felt this would normally come to Council as a consent agenda item because it was essentially a ministerial decision. He stated the City would be assured the site was redeveloped beyond the standards required by the zoning codes per the agreement. The City would also be assured that the off-site sewer would be constructed by CVS. He noted once CVS redeveloped the site per the agreement, the existing sewer easement would be released. He commented that final building plans had been submitted and reviewed, and there was only one substantive comment, which was that Council could decide if the design shown met the interpretation of Code when it considered the easement release agreement. He provided a history, which included the denial of a rezoning in October, 2013, and explained the reasons for denial were the desire for two stories, pedestrian access off of Broadway, and architectural enhancements. Afterwards, new building plans were completed and the site was redesigned so it fit within the existing zoning, but those building plans had not been approved because the law changed in August, 2014 requiring two stories and an entrance off Broadway. In December, 2014, CVS redesigned the building plans so the building was two stories and had an entrance off of Broadway with the understanding the offsite sewer would not be constructed. This new redesign had been denied because off-site sewer had not been included and there was uncertainty with regard the second story and dumpster location. He believed those three issues had now been resolved. He commented that the documentation he had provided by outside experts confirmed the building plans included a second story.
Ms. Peters understood the CVS project had been denied in October, 2013 because the building plans lacked two stories, and questioned why that was still being discussed two years later. She asked why CVS was not willing to build a second floor. Mr. Hollis replied he did not agree with the statement that CVS was unwilling to build it. He explained the property had open zoning so they only had to obtain building permits, but they had been really concerned about the City's plans with regard to development for the northwest corner as those plans had not been solidified at that time. They decided the best way to deal with that situation was to rezone the site even though it was not necessary as it would provide more
14

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
flexibility, but there had not been a requirement for two stories at that time. The redesign in 2013 after the rezoning request was denied did not include two stories because it was still not required and Council approval was not necessary since it would be on a site with open zoning. The law changed in August, 2014, which then required two stories by law.
Fred Berry understood the City was claiming there was a revenue shortfall due to internet sales, and he did not agree with that statement because he felt that was a small percentage of purchases. He believed the real problem was the number of business service people that lived in surrounding towns because it was too expensive to live in Columbia. He felt the Council viewed the budget and strategies as a zero sum game in terms of how the money would allocated, so they then became involved in nuance discussions that did not help the City. He noted the City needed a growth strategy instead of a strategy on how to allocate the money. He commented that it was very hard to do business in Columbia, especially if one was trying to start a business. He suggested they make it easy for people to do business if they wanted people to move to Columbia. He believed a lot of what had been discussed by Council today should be handled by the staff, and that the Council was wasting their own time and the public's time. He stated Columbia needed more police officers, and he did not feel that would happen with this strategy. He commented that it would only happen if they grew the economy of the City, and that meant making it easy for the private sector to do business.
Rosie Gerding, 101 S. Fifth Street, stated she resided in a building located immediately across from Flat Branch Park on Fourth Street. She commented that she and her husband were among many private citizens that had made donations to help ensure the park was nicely developed, and noted they cared about what happened to it, which was why they objected to the design proposed by CVS. She explained the ordinance the Council was considering tonight created a link between the sewer easement and the building design. Due to this link, she believed it was clear that there would not be any opportunity for further public or Council discussion regarding the design of the building if the Council voted in favor of vacating the sewer easement, and at that point, it would be solely up to staff to make the decision. She pointed out the Council had been shown great examples of what CVS could build in past meetings, so there was ample proof CVS would build what the community wanted if the community insisted. She felt the building design mattered because it sat next to Flat Brach Park. Regardless of the environmental regulations that might apply, the closing of an additional 157 linear feet of Flat Branch Creek and the excavation of the site so close to the Creek could only have an adverse impact, and was the reason a second story on the building mattered. A building with a full second story had adaptive reuses going forward that a building with a partial, fake second story or mezzanine did not. If they had to inflict injury on the Creek, she suggested they only do it once every 90-100 years instead of every 20-25 years because the building had grown obsolete. The proposed building was not technically two stories high. It was a 24 foot tall building with one story. She commented that she believed a true front door on Broadway mattered, and this design did not have an entrance on Broadway. The proposed beveled door facing Providence Road led to a corridor that led to the middle or back of the building, and did not promote the collective vision of a pedestriancentered walkable downtown. She noted the Council had the power and obligation to
15

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
negotiate a better deal for the citizens of Columbia and the property owners that had invested in restoring downtown historic buildings.
Ms. Nauser understood Ms. Gerding's husband owned a business in the downtown and asked if he would approve of having a front door at the back of his building. Ms. Gerding replied her husband's business was an accounting firm and not a retail business. Ms. Nauser explained she was trying to understand why they would want to require a front door, which was essentially at the back of the building. Ms. Gerding stated she believed pedestrians would approach it from that side, and would not walk through the parking lot to get to the door that serviced automobiles. Ms. Nauser commented that since it was a retail establishment they would not want to provide access at a point where there was not a cashier in case someone tried to shoplift.
Geneva Moody, 1421 Torrey Pines Drive, commented that she believed it was time to make the decision to allow CVS to proceed with their store. She noted she fully supported the proposal as it would generate a lot of tax revenue, which was needed to fund police officers and other necessities. She was not aware of any detriment of this development.
Nick Peckham, 15 S. Tenth Street, stated he was representing the Downtown Columbia Leadership Council and explained they were opposed to this for several reasons to include the fact the sewer easement was tied to a set of building plans because it was essentially asking the Council to grant them a building permit. He thanked Mr. Teddy for providing the clear definition of a floor, which for better or worse was what the Council had passed. He understood City staff had contacted the International Code Council in Chicago, Illinois, and it was clearly stated a second floor went from wall to wall. It was not a mezzanine. He pointed out some buildings had more complex shapes, but this was a rectangular building with a mezzanine. He suggested the Council separate the sewer easement issue from the building permit issue if they felt the need to grant the easement. He stated he also felt the comments Ms. Gerding made with regard to Flat Brach Creek deserved some consideration because placing a parking lot across the Creek with a high retaining wall facing the Park did not seem to be a sound decision. He noted this was the western entrance to downtown Columbia, and a benefit of form based zoning was that it created buildings that had a form which was appropriate to the community. The proposed building did not appear to be congruent to the form of a historic structure or more recently constructed structure in downtown Columbia. It appeared to be a shopping center building. He urged the Council to either vote against this ordinance or to at least separate the building plan issue from the sewer issue.
Ann Peters, 3150 N. Route Z, explained she was a former member of the Planning and Zoning Commission and believed the intent with the interim C-2 zoning ordinance was for two stories to be two stories per the International Code Council. She felt CVS was trying to game the system. The City had been dealing with this issue for two years, and CVS was inching their way forward by trying to convince Council to grant them a sewer easement. The sewer easement was the leverage held by the City to get the plan that should have been submitted two years ago. She asked the Council to vote against this ordinance.
Deanna Walkenbach, 407 Pyranees Drive, commented that she believed the Council needed to acknowledge the interim C-2 zoning ordinance was in place and the law at this
16

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
time. She stated she did not believe the CVS proposal was a two-story building. She felt the Council should vote against this ordinance if CVS chose not to adhere to the current zoning codes, which included the requirement for a two-story building, and noted other communities that had done it had been successful. She believed CVS would come back with a better plan if they truly wanted to be good citizens of Columbia, and commented that they had not been a good neighbor over the last two years as they had refused to comply with most if not all of the requests made of them. She pointed out they had complied with the requests of other communities, to include North Kansas City. If the Council chose not act on the C-2 zoning requirement and did not respect the bargaining opportunity the applicant had provided by linking the release of the sewer easement to the building design, she thought they would further erode the citizens' trust of the City's processes. Allowing City staff to make the decision regarding interim C-2 zoning compliance was a bad idea as it was a legal zoning matter, and needed to be the decision of the Council. She asked the Council to make the right decision.
Pat Fowler, 606 N. Sixth Street, stated she was representing the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) and displayed a few images of other CVS stores throughout the nation whereby CVS occupied the first floor of multi-story buildings. She noted the HPC had held a half-day retreat in which it spent most of its time discussing the CVS proposal in order to satisfy a request made by the Council on April 6, 2015, and had come up with some guidelines, which included brick with limestone accents, the elimination of spray-on insulation, the removal of oversized blocks and fake glass, etc. She commented that they liked the elevations one of the Council Members had discussed publicly in November, 2014. They felt a true entrance on Broadway was historically appropriate and was a pedestrianfriendly way to build. They believed the entrance needed to be more than a visual feature. In terms of the concern for two entrances, she pointed out the CVS building in North Kansas City had a two real entrances. One served pedestrians and the other served automobiles. She displayed a photo of a retaining wall, and asked the Council to require a decorative retaining wall so it looked like the retaining and decorative walls at Flat Brach Park. She also displayed photos of the CVS in North Kansas City and described the features of that building. She understood there had been a lot of back and forth between CVS and North Kansas City, and CVS had built the building nine years ago. She asked for that same consideration for Columbia, and for the Council to ask CVS to negotiate in good faith in order to construct a better building.
Dan Cullimore, 715 Lyon Street, commented that he did not believe the entrance from Providence Road met the C-2 zoning requirements, and was also concerned because that entrance opened on to the proposed gateway, which was anticipated to be a public space, much like a park. He did not believe any other business had been allowed to have a landmark entrance at the expense of the public, and felt CVS should not be allowed to appropriate the future gateway for their exclusive commercial benefit. He pointed out CVS had not been a good player in this process. On April 6, 2015, the Council had denied a prior sewer release agreement and had asked the applicant and the Historic Preservation Commission to work toward a design that would respect the architectural integrity of surrounding structures, but Mr. Hollis had been unable to tell them if there would be signage
17

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
in addition to that which had been shown in the packet Council had received or whether changes could be made to the exterior design and materials. He noted Mr. Hollis had only indicated CVS would be hiring a new design firm. He pointed out the drawings attached to this agreement tonight had the same architect stamp as previously, and wondered what happened to the new architect. If Council approved this ordinance tonight, the City would get what the agreement indicated, which were the minimum standards essential for compliance with the agreement. He reminded the Council that the entrances to the Second Missionary Baptist Church, the Blind Boone Home, and the entrance and dining patio for Shiloh would be across the corner from where they were proposing to locate the dumpsters.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, wondered why CVS would not just build an actual two-story building. The proposed ordinance could be best described as a sewer easement with approval of a site agreement purporting to address two violations of the zoning ordinance. If the Council approved the sewer release agreement, it was also approving the designs. He pointed out the building permit would likely be denied and appealed to the Board of Adjustment, so he felt the Council needed to be clear on the subject. He encouraged the Council to defeat this ordinance in its entirety to send a message to the applicant and staff that business would not be conducted in this manner. In addition to defeating this ordinance, he hoped the Council would direct staff to construe the current interim C-2 zoning ordinance to require two full functional stories. He agreed sales taxes would be collected from the development, but pointed out there would be more if the building was two or three stories, and it would not provide much of an increase initially since it would be siphoning sales taxes from other pharmacies in town. He commented that form based zoning did not only involve appearances, and noted it only placed more emphasis on appearances than uses. He explained it was very much about performance as well, which was why it should not be a one-story building.
Dan Moylan, 4607 Silverheel Street, Shawnee, Kansas, stated he was with CVS Health and explained they had worked on this project for many years to try to accommodate and become a part of the strong and vibrant community in Columbia. They had spent hundreds of thousands of dollars to get to the point they were at today, and had worked in good faith. They had worked to the best of their abilities to try to accommodate the requests and requirements of a process. He pointed out there were many opinions of what the building should look like, and they were one entity trying to listen and accommodate those opinions in designing a building that would be approved by the Council. He noted they had gone through great lengths to change their prototype so the store would face Broadway, but they had just heard someone say they did not want it to face Broadway. He commented that they had the potential to bring 2-3 stores to Columbia at about $65,000 per store in additional sales taxes, and believed they would bring people from outside of the community to help generate sales taxes. He felt this was a clear request clouded by the intent to interpret a very straightforward Code of Ordinances, and believed the Code stated 24 feet in height was two stories. The Code did not indicate how large the second floor needed to be, and there was no way to tell what was above the first floor at any of the stores shown in the Kansas City area. He asked the Council to approve this easement vacation based upon the written Code.
18

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala asked if those stores in Kansas City had full second stories. Mr. Moylan replied he could not say as he did not know what was on the second stories of those buildings, but noted the outsides of those buildings looked like they were two stories, similar to the proposed design for the Columbia store.
Mr. Skala understood CVS was already a presence in Columbia as a part of Target. Mr. Moylan stated that was not yet a completed deal.
Peter Yronwode, 203 Orchard Court, commented that he did not believe the proposed plans included a second story or met the intent of the C-2 zoning ordinances, and by accepting the sewer easement at this time, the Council would be capitulating to their cheap, money driven decisions to not accommodate the architectural necessities this site required. He urged the Council to not allow them to build a fake façade on one of the most important corners of Columbia, and to force them to do the right thing by rejecting the sewer easement.
David Barnett, 1109 Simmons Ridge Drive, Collierville, Tennessee, stated he was with Carlson Consulting Engineers, the civil engineer for this CVS project and noted the sewer relocation plans had been reviewed and approved by City staff with the only issue being the easement vacation. He explained the easement would be vacated upon completion of construction of this new public sewer main per City standards. He commented that the authority that had jurisdiction over the enclosure of the Flat Branch Creek was the Corps of Engineers, and they had reviewed and granted a permit based on the proposal. The section that would be enclosed was a highly disturbed portion of the Creek. It actually went under one of the existing buildings on the site, and was already enclosed by concrete on two sides. He pointed out a traffic study had been conducted a couple of years ago with regard to this site, which had been reviewed by City and MoDOT staff, and both entities had approved the proposed driveway locations. He noted they had a permit for the entrance on to Providence Road from MoDOT already.
Carol Stevenson, 3212 Shoreside Drive, pointed out the subject property had been purchased in 1979 by Mark Stevenson, who then began to accumulate historical artifacts associated with the Ice Plant. She explained that in 1981, Mr. Stevenson had co-published a report explaining how the building on the site was important to Columbia historically, and in 2006, he had held a celebration for the 100 anniversary of the building. At that time, the Historic Preservation Commission (HPC) had shown no interest in the building. In 2007, she noted she had submitted to a report to the HPC for application for the Most Notable Property recognition and did not receive a response. She resubmitted the report in 2008, and in 2009 an award was given to the bricks in the City, but they had neglected the Ice Plant. Today, they were working with David Sapp and Chris Campbell of the Boone County Historical Society, and planned to donate the Ice Plant artifacts to the Society. She noted the HPC had ignored the Ice Plant for years, and their sudden attention was unexplainable, very belated, and unfunded. She felt the actions of the HPC were unproductive and obstructive, and asked the Council to ignore them. She encouraged the Council to attend the upcoming History of Downtown Columbia exhibit at the Boone County Historical Society as many of the Ice Plant artifacts would be on display.
John John, 33 E. Broadway, explained he was realtor who walked down Broadway 2-3 times a week to go to lunch, and 40,000 vehicles traveled by that site. He did not understand
19

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
how people could walk through the parking lot to Walgreens, but could not walk halfway down an entryway into this proposed building. He stated he rarely passed anyone walking until he got up to about Eighth Street. He understood everyone wanted a second story and noted they had tried to lease the second stories in buildings in the area, but it was too far away from where people wanted second stories. He noted there were a lot of vacant second stories, and explained one a block away had been vacant for 15 years. He did not believe it would be productive to build more vacant second stories. He commented that he was concerned with the number of times the City had asked for changes. CVS had presented plans and had been ready to begin construction twice, but the Council had held up the project both times. He understood the plans that had been initially presented by CVS had met City Code, but the City staff did not like it, and this had allowed time for the Council to change the Code. He asked how many times CVS would be required to come back to Council due to people changing their minds with regard to what they wanted. This project would assist with jobs and create competition so there were better prices. In many college towns, CVS stores included walk-in doctor facilities, which he thought would be nice for the downtown. He believed this project would help downtown Columbia and the citizens of downtown Columbia, and turning the project down would only help Walgreens.
Roger Fries, 3512 Hedgewood Drive, commented that he had previously worked in site selections for a large fast food company and noted he would have walked away two years ago if this situation had occurred on one of his projects. He understood there was a sales tax lag and suggested the Council not ask for an increase in sales tax when they were scaring away businesses. He stated CVS did not want to be a landlord, and he did not understand why they should be forced to build a finished second floor as long as it fit architecturally from the outside as it was a waste of time and money.
Matt McCormick, 300 S. Providence Road, stated he was the President of the Columbia Chamber of Commerce and explained the Chamber did not get involved with individual zoning cases for individual companies, but thought the process associated with this CVS project had been asinine due to the changing of the rules arbitrarily. He felt the rules had arbitrarily changed since it happened 12:30 a.m. as that did not allow for due process. He commented that he felt the process associated with this project was an embarrassment and was not how business should be done in a community as great as Columbia.
Donn Fizer, 1200 Corporate Drive, Birmingham, Alabama, noted he was with Orange Development and explained that when the request of CVS to rezone the property had been denied in October, 2013, there was not a requirement for a two story building. The Council had just indicated that they would like to see two-story architecture and some levels of enhancements, and they had listened. He stated they had met individually with Council Members, met with staff, etc. He felt they had done everything possible, and it did not appear to be enough. He understood the sewer had always been an issue, but CVS did not feel it was their responsibility to be tasked with upgrading the sewer, and had put money into the architecture instead of the sewer. The City had indicated the sewer had to be addressed so they modified their budget to address the sewer. In terms of the two-story architecture situation, he pointed out he believed they were compliant. He referred to the letters provided by Mr. Hollis and stated this was not a mezzanine. He commented that a second story was
20

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
defined by use, and the upper level would house offices and include an elevator. In addition, there was ingress and egress capacity. He believed it was a second story. He noted the City sales tax would be $65,000 per store. He explained they needed to demolish the existing structure and install the new sewer prior to the sewer easement being vacated, so they were making a large capital investment without knowing when a building permit would be issued. He stated he did not feel this was a bait and switch situation, and that it was a situation of assurances. They would deliver two-story architecture with a great looking architectural building.
Ms. Thompson commented that there had been a continued reference to the building code and the International Code Council (ICC) as it related to the definition of a second story by the public, and pointed out the letter provided by Mr. Hollis indicated the ICC did not provide direction and using definitions in the building code to address planning requirements was not the intent of the International Building Codes (IBC). She wanted to ensure this was understood by the Council as there was a difference between the zoning code and the building code.
Mayor McDavid stated he intended to support this ordinance, and noted he found the history of this project to be tedious and embarrassing. He thought, as a city, they needed to be predictable and consistent. He believed they needed to lay out a set of clear rules so anyone building a development knew what was needed and anyone selling a property knew how that property could be used. He pointed out he did not believe CVS was faultless due to the sewer issue, which was only recently resolved. He commented that even the staff was confused with regard to the two-story issue, and he believed the building looked like it was two stories. He noted the City was spending a lot of money on form based zoning because they felt form meant something, and if this failed tonight it would be due to government overregulation. He thought it was time to allow CVS to move forward with this project.
Ms. Nauser commented that she was concerned with Council legislating by project. In the past, it involved light fixtures, and today, it was the definition of two stories. The C-2 zoning ordinance indicated 24 feet in height, which this proposed project met. It also indicated there was not a minimum requirement for a floor area, which made her question the need for an entire second floor. She believed that the C-2 interim zoning ordinance was passed solely to thwart growth and development in the downtown, and felt that was supported by the legislative history on the CVS store. The interim C-2 zoning required streetside non-residential first floor space and for those spaces to include entrances on Broadway and Ninth Street even when the initial plans had delineated the entranceway facing south. She noted the two-story requirement had also been included after finding out the CVS design was only one story. She reiterated the interim C-2 zoning changes were in response to the Opus and CVS projects. The height restriction of 120 feet or ten stories was included due to a potential 19-story student housing project. She reiterated she felt the changes to C-2 zoning were in response to developments that were unpopular with some in the community. She understood some would argue the $65,000 in sales tax that would be generated by CVS would come from other stores within Columbia, but noted some employers in Columbia had CVS as a preferred pharmacy, which would allow many people the option to obtain medications at a discounted price. She believed competition was good as it caused lower
21

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
prices and provided choices for consumers. She stated jobs were needed in the community, and CVS would provide jobs in the First Ward. She commented that the First Ward average median income was $18,000 while the average median income of the Fourth Ward was $85,000. The majority of those in the First Ward had a high school diploma while the majority of those in the Fourth Ward had a graduate degree or above. She noted the unemployment rate in the African-American community was at 15 percent, and only four percent for those that were white. She pointed out the City did not have architectural controls or standards like many other communities, and explained that she would not want that because everything looked the same in those communities. She stated she loved the eclectic nature of downtown. She believed they were holding up a project in the community that would bring jobs, sales taxes, property taxes, etc. She understood Walgreens paid approximately $42,000 a year in property taxes to the Columbia Public Schools, and noted if the CVS property appraised at an amount near what the Walgreens property had appraised at, another $42,000 or more would go to the Schools to help with the achievement gap and to provide the quality education they expected in the community without creating a burden on the Schools. She stated she would vote in favor of this project since it would provide more money for the Schools and create jobs, and because she felt the Council needed to be consistent in how they legislated. She commented that if the City wanted architectural controls, the City needed to pass the appropriate ordinances. She did not believe this development should be held up for architectural reasons.
Mr. Skala stated he would vote against this sewer easement vacation. He felt if they were going to legislate by ordinance, they needed to legislate with the interim C-2 zoning ordinance since it was currently law. He took offense to comments indicating the decision was made at 12:30 a.m. with no preparation or thought as he did not feel that was true. He noted they had discussed the H3 Charrette, gradients for building heights, etc. He agreed some of the changes were precipitated by the onslaught of student housing developments downtown that put pressure on the sewer exigency and electric exigency issues, and that was the reason an extra review process was needed for buildings over ten stories tall. He commented that he felt there had only been one change since the CVS project had come forward and that was the interim C-2 zoning ordinance, which was needed and in response to the community demanding that something be done to address the change in the character of the downtown. He believed building in the downtown should accommodate mixed-uses as those buildings would be around for a long time. He agreed with Mr. Thomas in that it was an investment, and did not agree with the comment that form based codes only considered how the development looked and did not consider uses as he did not feel that was true. He reiterated that the C-2 zoning ordinance was the law and should be followed, and he believed CVS would come back with concessions that were in the community interest.
Mr. Thomas recognized Mark and Carol Stevenson as they were locally focused business people who had worked hard and had given a tremendous amount back to the community, to include helping the Columbia Center for Urban Agriculture. He explained he hated voting against something that was in their better interest, but noted he had been elected to represent the community. He felt the Comprehensive Plan was the best documentation of community input they had, and the interim C-2 zoning was very consistent
22

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
that vision. He commented that this location deserved the kind of architectural and building design legislated in the zoning code at a minimum. He stated he was not opposed to CVS operating a pharmacy at that location, and would support it if the plan complied with the City's zoning code. He explained, today, he would vote against the vacation of the easement because it was clearly tied to the building design, which was not consistent with the vision of the community.
Mr. Trapp commented that the Council was currently considering a sewer vacation, which had a lower threshold or standard for approval. He explained he had voted against the CVS project when it had come forward for rezoning because it did not confirm with City plans. CVS then developed a plan utilizing the existing zoning, but it had issues with the routing of the sewers. Staff had now reached accommodation with CVS in terms of the sewer vacation. He agreed that when the City granted special privileges, it provided an opportunity for exactions or compromises that could improve the project for the overall benefit of the community. He pointed out he had voted against the interim C-2 zoning ordinance changes, but respected the will of the majority of the Council as that was how they ruled. He commented that he had reviewed the Planning and Zoning Commission minutes when they had discussed the interim C-2 zoning ordinance, and a second story minimum had not been discussed. He recalled that had not come forward in any form of public discussion or public input, and that it had been brought forth by former Council Member Ginny Chadwick as an amendment after public comment had been taken and that it was at about 12:30 a.m. He believed there was a lack of clarity in the ordinance because it had come up one time late at night, which was not the way to pass good law. He felt the law indicated two stories equaled 24 feet, and his vote was to instruct staff to interpret it as such. He commented that a lot of the architectural and design elements of the building were aspirational. The examples provided by Ms. Fowler were constructed in the architectural context of the surrounding area. The surrounding area of the CVS project in Columbia included the uninspiring Walgreen across the street and a strip mall with a payday loan. He believed the proposed CVS plan moved them in the right direction as it extended the feel of downtown since it was a taller building than the surrounding area, which had a lot of one-story buildings, especially the further they got from the center of downtown because there was less demand. He commented that he thought it was dangerous for government to overstep its bounds and to dictate the market. He did not feel a strict interpretation of the second floor guideline was appropriate or fair because CVS could have made a tactical decision that would have led to a different outcome if they would have tried to move forward with the existing zoning instead of requesting a rezoning of the property. He noted the City would get enhanced pedestrian infrastructure and a place people could walk, and pointed out walkability involved having a place to walk to in addition to pedestrian infrastructure. He thought it would be nice to have more shopping options for those living in the downtown. He commented that it had been entirely consistent and reasonable to have voted against this as a rezoning and to be supportive of it as a sewer vacation, and stated he would vote in favor of this tonight.
Ms. Peters stated she also appreciated the community involvement of Mark and Carol Stevenson, and would like to be able to approve this as she would like CVS to be in Columbia, but noted she felt a two-story building needed to have a second floor. She
23

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
believed the form needed to be appropriate to the area, and hoped CVS would come back with a building that would work in that location as she agreed with Ms. Nauser in that it would be helpful to collect more tax money.
Mr. Ruffin commented that he had spent a lot of time listening to both sides of this issue and explained he had been favorably impressed with the representatives of CVS in terms of their willingness to address concerns as he had heard them presented in the past. He stated he was in favor of CVS coming to Columbia as it would create jobs and opportunities and add to our tax revenues. He noted he had mixed feeling with regard to the process as it had been explained to him involving C-2 zoning and the history of the Flat Branch Creek. He pointed out he had a personal connection with the area and wanted to see the history of the area respected and honored in some way, and hoped CVS would continue to work to address some of these final issues. He commented that he felt he was caught between representing what he believed was best and representing what his constituents had indicated to him. Those who lived in the First Ward and had communicated with him had asked that he vote against this project. As a result, he was inclined to honor their opinions, and due to his limited knowledge, he was also inclined to respect the recommendations of staff. He noted he would vote against this ordinance.
B249-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, TRAPP, NAUSER. VOTING NO: PETERS, RUFFIN, SKALA, THOMAS. Bill declared defeated.

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B240-15
B241-15 B243-15 B244-15
B246-15
B247-15 B248-15 R137-15 R138-15

Vacating a water and electric easement within Vesser's Subdivision Plat No. 2 located on the west side of Fourth Street and south of Conley Avenue.
Authorizing a consolidated grant agreement with the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission for transportation planning services.
Authorizing a road improvement agreement with Boone County, Missouri relating to the Scott Boulevard Phase III project; appropriating funds.
Authorizing a first amended and restated development agreement with Jeffrey E. Smith Investment Co. relating to property located on the southeast corner of Nifong Boulevard and Bethel Street.
Authorizing a license agreement with Tripwire, Inc. to provide cybersecurity tools as part of the Energy Management System (EMS) implementation.
Accepting a conveyance for utility purposes.
Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Teen Outreach Program (TOP).
Transferring funds to cover accrual payouts for employee retirements.
Transferring funds for the Columbia Financial Enterprise Resource System (COFERS) software project.

24

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting

R139-15

Approving the issuance of bonds by the Housing Authority of the City of Columbia, Missouri for a housing project.

R140-15

Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with TREKK Design Group, LLC for post-rehabilitation flow data analysis for the Flat Branch-A, Flat Branch-B and Site 12 basin areas.

R141-15

Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with TREKK Design Group, LLC for an Inflow and Infiltration (I/I) study of the County House Branch-D and Flat Branch-G basin areas.

R142-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 2 to the agreement for professional engineering services with TranSystems Corporation for design of the MKT to Parkade Bike Boulevard project.

R143-15

Authorizing the temporary closure of a portion of the sidewalk on the west side of Fifth Street between Stewart Road and Elm Street, near 413 S. Fifth Street, to facilitate the expansion of an electrical manhole.

R144-15

Authorizing temporary closure of a portion of the vehicular lane and sidewalk on Fourth Street between Stewart Road and Conley Avenue, the sidewalk on the east side of Providence Road between Stewart Road and Turner Avenue, the sidewalk on the west side of Fifth Street between Conley Avenue and Turner Avenue, and a portion of the vehicular lane and sidewalk on Turner Avenue between Providence Road and Fifth Street to facilitate the construction of a student housing development at 604 S. Fourth Street.

R145-15

Authorizing an operations agreement with Thumper Productions, L.L.C. for the 2015 Roots N Blues N BBQ Festival at Stephens Lake Park; authorizing an agreement with Adventure Tree, L.L.C. for an activity at the Roots N Blues N BBQ Festival.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS
R146-15 Recognizing lieutenants of the Columbia Police Department as an appropriate representative unit of employees with a mutually acceptable community of interest separate from other Columbia Police Department employees.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Ms. Buckler provided a staff report. The vote on R146-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

R147-15 Adopting the City of Columbia, Missouri Strategic Plan ­ 2016-2019.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Matthes provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser made a motion to amend R147-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.

25

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Thomas stated he was very supportive of the Strategic Plan, to include the amendment that was just passed because implicit bias was an invisible negative force people did know they had. He thought being mindful of its existence and approaching everything with that in mind would go a long way in improving the community.
Mr. Skala commented that the Council and staff had spent an enormous amount of time on the Strategic Plan, and thought it had been wildly popular with the public. He also thought it served the community well. He noted he would proudly support it.
The vote on R147-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING
The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

B250-15 B251-15 B252-15 B253-15
B254-15 B255-15
B256-15 B257-15 B258-15 B259-15

Amending Chapter 2 of the City Code to change the name of the city department of "Public Communications" to "Community Relations" and add a Utilities Department.
Amending Chapters 12A, 13, 17, 22, 25, 27 and 29 of the City Code as it relates to the creation of a utilities director and reorganization of the duties of the public works director.
Amending Chapter 19 of the City Code as it relates to personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations.
Adopting the FY 2016 Classification and Pay Plan; providing FY 2016 salary adjustments relating to the Classification and Pay Plan; providing for a 2% salary increase for eligible employees; establishing an implementation date of September 27, 2015.
Rezoning property located on the north side of St. Charles Road and west of Elderbrook Drive (4515 St. Charles Road) from District A-1 to District R1.
Approving the Final Replat of Landmark Subdivision ­ Plat 3 located on the south side of McAlester Street and the north side of Country Club Drive; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction.
Approving the Final Plat of Wyndham Ridge, Plat No. 3-A, a Replat of Lot D2 Wyndham Ridge Plat No. 3, located on the north side of Steinbrooke Terrace and east of Scott Boulevard.
Approving the Final Plat of Wyndham Ridge, Plat No. 3-B, a Replat of Lot D3 Wyndham Ridge Plat No. 3, located on the north side of Steinbrooke Terrace and east of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Approving the Final Plat of Rock Bridge Christian Church Plat 3, a minor Replat of Lot 201 Rock Bridge Christian Church Plat 2 located on the north side of Green Meadows Road and east of Bethel Street.
Authorizing construction of street and sewer improvements along a portion of Discovery Drive, from the intersection of Discovery Drive and Discovery Parkway southeastward; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

26

B260-15

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of sanitary sewer improvements along the MKT Trail and Providence Road from Stadium Boulevard to Elm Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 1.

B261-15

Authorizing an STP-Urban Program supplemental agreement with the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission for the Providence Road improvement project from Stadium Boulevard to Stewart Road.

B262-15

Authorizing an agreement for conveyance of easements with Woodrail Home Owners Association No. 4 as it relates to the Forum Boulevard pedestrian bridge (GetAbout) project; vacating easements for sidewalk and drainage and temporary construction purposes.

B263-15

Appropriating transit division funds to cover overages in personnel and fleet maintenance accounts.

B264-15

Declaring the results of the election held in the City of Columbia, Missouri on August 4, 2015; reimposing a sales tax of one-fourth of one percent for funding capital improvements.

B265-15

Authorizing amendments to PCS antenna agreements and memorandums of lease with T-Mobile Central LLC relating to the lease of property and space on the Shepard Water Tower (1160 Cinnamon Hill Lane) and the Walnut Street Water Tower (15 E. Walnut Street).

B266-15

Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Families America program.

B267-15

Authorizing a memorandum of understanding with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the issuance of birth and death certificates and the associated technology resources.

B268-15

Accepting a Walmart Community Grant to be used by the Fire Department for the purchase of physical training equipment for the Fire Training Academy; appropriating funds.

B269-15

Appropriating funds to cover the costs of FY 2015 medical and prescription drug claims.

B270-15

Appropriating funds to the Firefighters' Retirement Fund and Police Retirement Fund.

B271-15

Appropriating FY 2014 General Fund savings to General Fund departments as part of the Incentive Based Budgeting Initiative.

B272-15

Appropriating FY 2014 General Fund savings for projects identified by the City Council as part of the Incentive Based Budgeting Initiative.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP87-15 Zoning Text Amendment to Section 29-16(b) - Self-service storage facilities.

Mr. Trapp made a motion directing staff to draft a potential text amendment to Section 29-16(b) of the Columbia Code of Ordinances for consideration by the Planning and Zoning Commission with regard to the conditions applicable to self-service storage facilities in C-3. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote.

27

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
REP88-15 Columbia Imagined Implementation Report Card Update.
Mr. Thomas commented that he believed this was a really good strategy for any planning process that resulted in a report with recommendations in order to document exactly what those recommendations were and what strategies were envisioned to implement them with a timeline, who it involved, etc. He noted this would allow them to track whether the recommendations were implemented, and thought this should be extended to task force recommendations. It would allow people in the community to easily see what was recommended, what had been done so far, what had been planned, etc., and they could then lobby the Council to continue that momentum.
Mr. Skala stated he had viewed this on the website and noted it was comprehensive and detailed, and now that they had a template, he thought it was a good idea to apply this to other reports and plans. He recommended the public go to the City's website to view this information. He reiterated he hoped to broaden its scope if it did not take too much staff time.
REP89-15 Administrative Public Improvement Project: Remodeling Control Room at the Municipal Power Plant.
Mr. Matthes and Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid understood this qualified for the administrative process and opposition was not expected at any level. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser understood this was mandated by NERC so they were required to do it. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct, and explained a back-up center was needed somewhere. Mayor McDavid stated it appeared staff had the consent of Council.
REP90-15 Hazardous Tree Removal - Stephens Lake Park.
Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if the trees would be replaced. Mr. Griggs replied yes. Ms. Peters asked if they would be replaced with large shade trees. Mr. Griggs replied he thought they would be replaced with trees similar to what were there now. He pointed out the City had probably planted over 120 new trees since taking over the Stephens Lake Park property. Mr. Skala asked if this had been referred to the Community Tree Task Force. Mr. Griggs replied he thought the emphasis of the Task Force was on private property. He noted the City Arborist, who attends the Task Force meetings, relays information back to them and other City departments. He explained they had shared their policies and procedures with the Task Force as well. Mr. Skala stated he would appreciate it if there was some contact with the Task Force in the future on items such as this. Mr. Griggs pointed out they did not remove trees quickly, and the City's foresters sometimes cringed with some of their time frames. Mr. Thomas stated he had read that someone in Moberly had been hit on the head with a large limb from a dead or dying tree, and was badly injured and was now suing them. He believed this was a smart move.
28

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
REP91-15 Water and Light Advisory Board - 2014 Report to the People and Council.
Mayor McDavid noted this report showed a decline in water usage and stability in electric use over the last few years, even with an increasing population. He asked if this reflected moderate summers. Mr. Johnsen replied yes, and agreed those utilities very weather dependent.
Mayor McDavid stated he could not tell how much City customers paid for electricity because of Columbia's tiered system. In addition, he could not compare them to other communities.
Mr. Skala understood weather dependency was the significant variable, but asked if messages for conservation played a role as well. Mr. Johnsen replied he hoped it did since the City spent a lot of time, effort, and money on conservation programs.
Mr. Trapp commented that he did not believe the weather factor was as significant of a variable when looking at 10 years of data, and thought there was evidence that Columbians were doing better about conserving both water and electricity. In looking at the nonrenewable energy sources, they were using less than they were in 2005, so they were moving in the right direction in spite of population growth.
Ms. Nauser understood the water level had been diminishing in alluvial aquifers due to more farm and residential uses, and hoped they promoted more water conservation in the future because she was concerned about diminishing groundwater supplies. Mr. Johnsen explained they were starting to put together an integrated resources plan for the water utility in preparation for their next bond issue, which would likely be in the 2017 and 2018 time frame, and would make a deliberate planning effort in that direction. Ms. Nauser understood the City had promoted rain gardens and native plantings in the past. Ms. Johnsen explained Columbia was lucky in that they had a good water supply, but that did not mean they should use it inappropriately.
REP92-15 Vision Commission Media Mention Report.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP93-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, thanked the Council for backing the recommendations of staff in terms of the CVS project, and noted this was how they stood up for the Comprehensive Plan as a plan instead of just guidelines. He also thanked Ms. Peters and Mr. Ruffin, as new Council Members, for digesting the information and coming to a reasonable conclusion. He pointed out staff had asked the Council to direct them on how to construe the interim C-2 zoning code, and he believed the Council should do it. He stated he was unclear as to who drafted the ordinance, which he believed to be a disastrous conflation of two issues, and imagined it was likely Mr. Hollis, the attorney for CVS. He was also surprised by how it got to be on the agenda, and asked the Council to ask staff because he did not believe it should have gone to the Council in this manner. He noted he commiserated
29

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
with those that thought the City's processes were a disaster, but this was what happened when revisions to planning and financing were not made for 25-30 years.
Roger Fries, 3512 Hedgewood Avenue, thought the City needed to review its bus transfer points as he did not believe City buses should stop on four lane streets, such as Forum Boulevard, as it made a mess of traffic with people trying to get around the buses. The buses were not just stopped to drop off passengers as there were also times the buses were stopped for 10-15 minutes waiting for another bus to catch up to them. He suggested they speak with shopping center owners or apartment complex owners to see if transfer points could be moved off of the streets and on to parking lots as he believed it would make things safer.
Joe Alder, 511 Parkade Boulevard, commented that as a citizen he strongly supported the social equity issues presented as part of the Strategic Plan, and noted he was one citizen that would be willing to do the hard work in the long haul to implement that plan. He stated he also supported the work of the Mayor's Task Force on Pedestrian Safety, and thought it was unfortunate it took a number of incidents of injury and death to get it organized, but hoped good would come out of it. He explained he had been driving home from work on I-70 Drive Southwest a couple of weeks ago when he saw a stranded young black man with dark clothing in a manual wheelchair off to the side in the shadows. He noted the kid had lost his wallet, which had $24 and his food stamp card, in a taxi cab and his cell phone was almost out of power. He stated the kid used his cell phone to call his 65 year old mother to pick him up, and luckily he had his wheelchair lift van so he was able to load him up to take him to a friend's house on Spencer Street to wait until his mom could pick him up. He thought they all needed to take a chance to connect with people they did not know to help ensure they had a safer and more equitable community. He believed this was also related to the shortage of police officers as people might feel more confident to reach out if they knew an officer might be by in 10-15 minutes if something were to go wrong. He commented that he had learned a lot from this experience, and asked the City to continue to keep up the good work with the Task Force and the social equity portion of the Strategic Plan.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, stated he thought people should be more empathetic.
Mr. Elkin noted he appreciated the presentation of Ms. Nauser in which she presented wage information for different areas of the community and believed that needed to be repeated to the media.
Mr. Elkin commented that while traveling eastbound on Northland Drive, he nearly collided with a paratransit driver at 6:00 p.m. as the driver had taken over more than half of the road. He asked the City to look into this matter.
Mr. Elkin stated he delivered eight donated CC's pizzas to the Wilkes homeless shelter, and had provided sodas that he had purchased. He noted there were many others in the community that could do the same or more.
30

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters asked for a status on the report they had requested with regard to ways to make Creasy Springs Road safer.
Ms. Peters noted she had received an e-mail regarding animals of people residing in the downtown peeing on concrete as it was permeating the concrete, and asked if staff could look into what other cities did and provide recommendations on how this situation could be improved.
Ms. Peters understood Eric Andersen and Associates had completed a review of the Police Department in 2012, and asked if the Council could receive an update as to how those recommendations were being implemented. Mr. Matthes stated a couple of updates had been provided in the past, which he could provide to her, and that he owed them another update.
Mr. Thomas stated he had received several calls on the same day from a constituent that had been very upset with regard to the standards of property management in the area he resided, which was along Walnut Street, and the City's enforcement of property codes. He noted the gentleman had not provided his name or number, and asked that this person call him again so they could discuss those issues.
Mr. Thomas thanked City staff for its work on the upcoming parking workshop. He understood the audit had been conducted and data had been collected. He explained the workshop would be held over two days. There was an evening presentation scheduled for 6:00 ­ 8:00 p.m. on September 22, and an all-day event on September 23 where the data would be analyzed and suggestions for policy recommendations would be made. He encouraged the Council to attend the evening event and observe the all-day event. He commented that he believed downtown parking was an important issue as the downtown became denser and more pedestrian-oriented, and he hoped this would result in a permanent downtown parking commission that would monitor the City's policies and plans.
Mr. Thomas asked staff to create a citizens handbook explaining the initiative petition and referendum petition processes.
Mr. Thomas understood the Code of Ordinance included rules in various locations on how to determine if sufficient infrastructure resources existed to serve a development, and asked if City staff could draft something that would pull all of that information together into one place.
Mr. Thomas asked for a report regarding downtown noise abatement late at night. He wanted to know what the laws stated and the City's enforcement strategy. He also wanted to know if there had been any violations or penalties in the past. He noted he had received a few complaints from downtown residents recently.
Mr. Skala explained he had provided the Council a handout at the Pre-Council Meeting regarding his thoughts on REDI and the Economic Development Director. It included three issues, and one was taxation with diminished representation as the taxpayer contribution had
31

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
tripled from 1988 to 2015. The other issues included an attempt to eliminate some conflicts of interest and improving within-government economic development coordination. He asked staff to find a strategy to incorporate these recommendations so Council could discuss it further at some point.
Mr. Skala stated he would like to recognize Mediacom for the new gigabyte internet service they would soon provide in Columbia.
Mr. Skala commented that a constituent had contacted him with regard to downtown parking in terms of the extended hours and the limitation of parking meters to only two hours. He understood merchants did not want people to stay in any one place for very long, but thought they might want to consider smart meters so people could extend time on a meter from their cell phones. He asked for a report on this issue to determine if they could resolve the issue of people having to leave meetings to extend meters.
Mr. Skala asked for a report with information regarding the ratio of rental properties to homeownership in areas contiguous to the Business Loop Community Improvement District (CID).
Mr. Skala asked for clarification regarding the differences in the crime data provided by a speaker tonight and the crime data provided to the Council by City staff. Ms. Nauser thanked Mr. Skala for asking for this information as she was interested in it as well. She wondered if the speaker might be referring to the recent shots fired incidents. She asked for information to be provided quarterly or every six months as it would be helpful. Mr. Matthes replied a report would be provided. He noted the definition of rape changed so those numbers increased nationwide. Ms. Nauser understood aggravated assaults and other incidents had gone up, but she did not feel a year's worth of data created a crime statistic. She pointed out she thought they were supposed to receive other information as well, to include the number of times the SWAT vehicle was used and the number police uses of force. She thought a report with all of this information would be beneficial.
Ms. Nauser stated she was currently gathering data with regard to the implementation of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence recommendations, and was hopeful City staff would continue that effort with a scorecard or dashboard.
Ms. Nauser understood the Columbia Police Department would be working on its strategic plan, and suggested they incorporate dialogue with the community by meeting with people in different areas of the community to obtain input as to what they felt that strategic plan should incorporate. She thought the money included in the budget for community policing could be used in that effort.
Ms. Nauser noted a recommendation of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence was for two City staff people to participate in the Boone County Offenders Transition Network, one of which would be a police officer. She explained this had not yet taken place to her knowledge and asked that it be done.
32

City Council Minutes ­ 9/8/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp reiterated the comments of Ms. Nauser in that they hoped City staff would be assigned to create a dashboard for the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence similar to the one created for the Comprehensive Plan so it was easier to reference.
Mr. Trapp noted the Boone County Offenders Transition Network had moved from general monthly meetings to quarterly meetings that were more like summits, and understood the next meeting would involve a presentation by social service agencies. He thought Steve Hollis might be a good person to help determine which City staff people should attend.
Mr. Trapp explained the MoDOT bridge replacement project had highlighted the connectivity issues between the north and south sides of Columbia, especially with regard to pedestrian facilities since they had temporarily lost the sidewalks on Range Line Street and Garth Avenues. It had really brought attention to the state of pedestrian infrastructure on Providence Road. He understood the sidewalks on the east side of Providence Road had been widened, but crosswalks were only placed on three of the legs at Vandiver Drive/Leslie Lane and Providence Road. He noted he would like to add the fourth pedestrian leg at that location because it was unreasonable for people to cross back to Leslie Lane/Vandiver Drive. He explained people tended to cross mid-block due to the destinations, and thought the fourth leg needed to be added. He asked for a report with the costs, traffic times, etc. to accomplish that fourth leg.
Mayor McDavid stated he did not understand where Mr. Skala was coming from with regard to REDI and felt he was the only Council Member to complain about REDI. He urged the Council to read the annual report of REDI as it was a robust organization that accomplished a lot. They were ranked number one in economic development in 2013. He thought it was the best collaboration he had been involved in among different governmental entities as it included Boone County, the University of Missouri, Hallsville, Centralia, and Ashland. He noted one of the four main goals of the University of Missouri was economic growth and economic development so they were very active partners in REDI and REDI had done a lot to help the University bring companies to Columbia.
Mr. Skala explained he was trying to make it a better organization that it was already, and suggested Mayor McDavid read the materials that were distributed.
The meeting adjourned at 11:32 p.m. Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
33

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI SEPTEMBER 21, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, September 21, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER and PETERS were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meeting of September 8, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Trapp.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Ms. Nauser asked that B261-15 be moved from the consent agenda to old business. The agenda, including the consent agenda with B261-15 being moved to old business, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Trapp.
SPECIAL ITEMS
MU Civil Engineering Academy of Distinguished Alumni Award presentation to Public Works Director John Glascock.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Glascock to join him at the podium, and explained Mr. Glascock had been presented with the Mizzou Civil Engineering Academy of Distinguished Alumni Award at a special ceremonial banquet held at the Tiger Hotel on Friday, September 18, 2015. The Civil Engineering Academy had been established in 1998 for the purpose of honoring civil engineering graduates from the University of Missouri who were outstanding in their field, leaders in community affairs, and worthy of emulation. He noted Mr. Glascock had graduated from University of Missouri in 1990 with a Bachelor's of Science in Civil Engineering, and had obtained his professional engineer license in 1995. He stated Mr. Glascock had joined the City of Columbia in 2003 as Chief Engineer of Public Works and was subsequently promoted to Public Works Department Director in 2005. He congratulated Mr. Glascock on receipt of this award.
Dan Watkins-Gary Whorton Personal Service Award presentation to Water and Light Director Tad Johnsen.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Johnsen to join him at the podium, and noted Mr. Johnsen had been presented with the Dan Watkins-Gary Whorton Personal Service Award during the Missouri Power Utilities Alliance Conference in Branson, Missouri on Thursday, September 17, 2015. The award was presented to an employee of an Alliance system that had actively participated in the Alliance for at least five years and whose special public or community
1

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
service had been a credit to public utilities. He explained Mr. Johnsen had served as the Director of Water and Light since 2010, and prior to his tenure as Director, he had served as the Utilities Power Production Superintendent from 1994-2010. During his time of leadership, the utility had earned a wide variety of national and state honors for its public service and environmental programs from the American Public Power Association, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and state organizations. Since 2012, Mr. Johnsen had served on the Executive Committee of the Missouri Joint Municipal Electric Utility Commission, a joint action agency that operated as an electric utility for the benefit of 67 member municipalities, and this year he had also served as Chair of the Commission. He congratulated Mr. Johnsen on receipt of this award.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Upon receiving the majority vote of the Council, the following individuals were appointed to the following Boards and Commissions.
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION Bernacik, Andrzej, 4414 Maxwell Lane, Ward 2, Term to expire August 1, 2016
CITY OF COLUMBIA NEW CENTURY FUND, INC. BOARD Gillispie, John, 5500 Kelsey Drive, Ward 3, Term to expire September 30, 2018
CONVENTION AND VISITORS ADVISORY BOARD Beard, Joan, 154 W. Green Meadows Road, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2016 Cristal, Scott, 2205 N. Country Club Drive, Ward 3, Term to expire September 30, 2017 Laird, Don, 1205 Larail Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2017 LaRocca, John, 2507 Corona Road, Ward 4, Term to expire September 30, 2017 McDonald, Bob, 13013 Strathmore Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2017 Thomas David, 155 Maple Grove Way, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2017
PERSONNEL ADVISORY BOARD Kinkade, Kevin, 4512 Royal Lytham Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2018 Slade, Leslie, 2107 Carol Drive, Ward 3, Term to expire September 30, 2018
SUBSTANCE ABUSE ADVISORY COMMISSION Landes, Derek, 1203 Spurgeon Court, Boone County, Term to expire October 31, 2017
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Lynn Maloney, Race Matters - Implementation of recommendations from the Final Report of Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence.
Ms. Maloney, 204 Maplewood Drive, stated she was a representative of Race Matters, and explained not one of the 28 recommendation presented by the Race Relations Task Force in 1996 to address racial inequities had been enacted. The only action taken as a result of that Task Force had been the mounting of a plaque by the back door of the Missouri Theatre. In May of this year, the City commemorated the bulldozing of the black business district known as Sharp End following a year long study focused on the loss of those
2

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
businesses and homes, and the sole result was a plaque placed on Walnut Street across
from the Post Office building. She commented that last November, this Council had received
the final report of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and nearly a year later, a
plan of action, budget, or timeline for completion for any of the recommendations was still not
in place. She felt race relations in Columbia were worse than a year ago, and this was due in
part to the very visible failure to act on the recommendations of that Task Force. She
explained the public needed evidence that City leaders were willing to make the necessary
effort to address and heal a host of racial inequities, which included inequities of health,
education, and unemployment. The Public Health and Human Services Department and the
Columbia Public Schools were leading the way in rectifying this negligence by training
several staff members to teach a program entitled Building Inclusive Communities, and the
Council had recently amended the City's Strategic Plan to address racial inequities within the
City's Administration. She understood Stephanie Browning, the Director of the Public Health
and Human Services Department, was committed to see the fulfillment of this amendment by
offering this training to City staff. She challenged all City leaders to make it a priority to
participate in the Building Inclusive Communities training in order to learn how to become
more effective in addressing social inequities, and noted she did not feel time or money were
acceptable excuses for not participating in the training.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B220-15 Adopting the FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B221-15 Amending Chapter 6 of the City Code as it relates to trade permit fees. B222-15 Amending Chapter 12A of the City Code as it relates to stormwater utility charges. B223-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code as it relates to parking fees for unmetered off-street municipal parking lots and facilities and parking meter hoods. B224-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to solid waste rates and services. B225-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to sanitary sewer utility connection fees. B250-15 Amending Chapter 2 of the City Code to change the name of the city department of "Public Communications" to "Community Relations" and add a Utilities Department. B251-15 Amending Chapters 12A, 13, 17, 22, 25, 27 and 29 of the City Code as it relates to the creation of a utilities director and reorganization of the duties of the public works director. B252-15 Amending Chapter 19 of the City Code as it relates to personnel policies, procedures, rules and regulations. B253-15 Adopting the FY 2016 Classification and Pay Plan; providing FY 2016 salary adjustments relating to the Classification and Pay Plan; providing for a 2% salary increase for eligible employees; establishing an implementation date of September 27, 2015.
Item A was read by the Clerk, B220-15, B221-15, B222-15, B223-15, B224-15, and
B225-15 were given fourth reading by the Clerk, and B250-15, B251-15, B252-15, and B253-
15 were given second reading by the Clerk.
Mr. Matthes provided a staff report.
Mr. Skala understood it might not be in the best interest of an employee to request an
open hearing, and asked if it would only be done at the request of the employee. Mr. Matthes
replied yes, and noted it had been requested five times in the past.
3

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters understood there were 31 new permanent positions and asked for clarification. Mr. Matthes replied that was a total, which sometimes constituted a half of a position, a quarter of a position, or one entire position. Ms. Peveler listed the positions and noted a couple of positions would be deleted too, such as a park ranger and a recreation specialist.
Mr. Skala asked about the shift in personnel from the City to the County for emergency services. Mr. Matthes replied the County had hired all of the employees so they were no longer employees of the City. The City, however, was still the landlord as they were using the same offices and equipment. He understood the County had broken ground and was in the process of constructing the new building, and would move the employees once that was done. Ms. Peveler explained the City was still carrying $1.1 million in the costs, but the County was reimbursing those costs.
Mayor McDavid understood the $17.39 million in personnel services for the Police Department included $2 million in unfunded accrued liability, and asked if that was a personnel cost. Mr. Blattel replied pension costs were part of personnel costs. Mayor McDavid commented that the problem with governmental accounting was that there was no way to know that $2 million of the $17.3 million was due to yesterday's employees. He thought subsequent council members needed to know the costs of the pension debt. Mr. Blattel stated staff had planned to add that information prior to publishing the final budget. Mayor McDavid pointed out the same issue existed for the Fire Department in that personnel expenses were $14.8 million but $2.8 million of that amount was for the pension liability.
Mr. Skala made a motion to amend B253-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Lorenzo Lawson, 2301 Shamrock Drive, commented that he was present to express his support for Columbia Access Television (CAT) as the program was instrumental to him and the at-risk youth he worked with as they were partnering with CAT to do a youth led talk show. The show would allow these youth to express their opinions and provide a different point of view. He explained young people tended to aspire to be a sports figure, a rapper, a nurse, etc., and he wanted them to know there were other career opportunities. CAT provided training in terms of how to use the cameras, how to edit, etc., and this was very valuable to them. Mr. Thomas understood Mr. Lawson had participated in a show on CAT that had been related to the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. Mr. Lawson stated that was correct. He explained the show had been entitled, What's Going On, and he had hosted it for about six months so the community was aware of what the Task Force was doing. Jennifer Erickson stated she was the Executive Director of CAT, and asked those in support of CAT to stand. Approximately 20 people stood. She thanked the City for its continued support of CAT and community media in the budget. This wise investment allowed residents and local non-profits to share their diverse voices with Columbia, learn new and innovative media skills, and gain access to high-tech video equipment and other media technology. If the Council decided to honor the current two-year contract, CAT would continue to put that funding to work in the community. City support of CAT helped to keep
4

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
membership fees affordable and to train community members in resume building skills. CAT also helped to contribute to community dialogue in a meaningful way through CAT produced shows, and residents were able to submit programming to CAT regardless of their views. City support also allowed CAT to continue to serve the underserved as part of its mission. She noted CAT was the only local organization to put high-tech video equipment in the hands of youth, local non-profits, and the public. She stated CAT did not want a blank check from the City, and wanted to continue to report to the City on its cable channel, programming statistics, partnerships, community events, and happenings at the downtown community media center on Tenth Street. She commented that CAT was much more than the public access television channel, and noted they were effectively Columbia's public voice.
Patricia Holt, 3705 Monterey Drive, stated she was in support of CAT and noted she joined CAT in 2008 when it was in the basement of Stephens College building. At that time, she had used their cameras to film a few things, but they did not have people around for editing and camera instructions so she did not rejoin the following year. She decided to try again in 2013, and they had better cameras and knowledgeable people to teach her how to use the cameras and editing software then. She stated it was nice to see young people and people closer to her age working on projects they had created using the equipment and training. She explained that after taking a studio class, she was able to facilitate an interview that was shown on CAT and her YouTube channel, which allowed her to put her ideas in a public forum. She also did some green screen shots, which she edited into a scene to make a silly movie. Since joining CAT in 2013, her films had been accepted in Give Me Truth, a part of the True/False Film Festival, and this year she would have a film in the Citizen Jane Film Festival. She had also purchased her own cameras and sound equipment, but still used the Panasonic camera and editing software at CAT's Tenth Street location. She stated CAT had helped her to continue to be a happy and productive member of Columbia, even at the age of 75.
Dan Komo, 3234 Jenne Hill Drive, explained he and his wife had started their own business a couple of years ago, and were involved with Tigers on the Prowl and a few other charities. He noted they had been able to use CAT services to help film items associated with those charities, and it had helped their business to learn more about filming commercials, etc. He understood a local writer planned to do a show on CAT next month, and believed the service was valuable.
Shawna Johnsen stated she was the Executive Director of Access Arts, a local arts education organization, and their mission was to provide creative learning experiences for everyone. They served all age groups and ability levels, and had provided free art education to over 6,000 people in 2014. They believed everyone could develop artistic skills if given the proper instruction, and their approach to combatting the thoughts of fine art being too elite or people needing to be born with an artistic ability was to share stories of students and staff through video. They showed real people learning art and enjoying themselves, and as a result, people were more apt to try it themselves. CAT had been instrumental in their videomaking efforts as the equipment was top notch and the staff was incredibly helpful in providing tips and guidance for their projects. She noted Access Arts was a small organization with a limited budget so they were unable to purchase this type of equipment or
5

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
contract for such professional services. They, however, were able to purchase an annual membership at CAT. In their first year with CAT, they had sponsored three University of Missouri students as interns, who were able to expand their own education by utilizing the equipment of CAT, and had produced twelve promotional and educational video for the organization. They had also launched their first Celebrarty fundraiser, and that project resulted in another six videos and over $4,000. She stated they needed this partnership to reach the community to pursue their mission, and noted CAT was a resource for all nonprofits in Columbia. She asked the Council to continue to support CAT.
Allan Benson explained he was an intern from the University of Missouri, and was supportive of CAT. He commented that CAT provided great opportunities for all majors and career paths, to include those in the Business School. He noted CAT allowed people to express their artistic voices and display what they had created. A decrease in funding for CAT would result in a loss of the artistic value created by community members.
Amy Roche stated she was a digital film maker and a work-study student at CAT. She appreciated CAT providing a platform for her to create films, and noted she and other Stephens College students were able to use the studio, equipment, etc. She pointed out she had learned a lot due to CAT resources during her first year of college.
David Wilson, 1810 Riback Road, commented that he was a co-founder of the Ragtag Cinema and the True/False Film Festival, and had a hand in creating CAT. He explained a friend of his, Kim, who had grown up in a small town in central Missouri and had no resources, had wanted to make movies. CAT had provided her the needed experience in film making, and she now had made films that had grossed over $20 million and had been included on an impressive list of 25 new faces in independent film. He pointed out she and four other Columbia film makers had been on that list since 2010, and all had directly or indirectly benefited from working with CAT. It was a great organization that supported film making in Columbia, which in turn supported other things. He felt the existence of CAT was vital to Columbia.
Peter Anger, 2101 W. Broadway, Suite 108, stated his support for CAT and agreed with Martin Luther King Jr. in that the creative, dedicated minority had made the world a better place. He believed CAT was a wonderful community organization, which allowed artists and progressives in the community to have a voice and express themselves through media. It allowed the opportunity to use the arts as a place to talk about what was important and to tell stories. The CAT website listed a variety of groups that expressed themselves creatively, and he thought it would behoove the City to continue to support CAT.
David Spear, 2607 Burrwood Drive, explained he became a member of CAT about a month ago because CAT provided him equipment for video editing that he could not afford. He saw media as a new art form, and thought it was beneficial to have a place to make that art and to then put that art on television. He pointed out this was great resource and special to Columbia as many other communities did not provide this opportunity. He encouraged the Council to continue to support CAT.
Joel Herron stated he was originally from a small town in Kansas and was blessed to have come to Columbia to attend Columbia College and earn a Bachelor's in Business, but had not known what he wanted to do after graduating from Columbia College. He had grown
6

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
up admiring entertainers, and had accidentally come across CAT where he and friends had produced a video that had gained national attention. As a result, he was inspired to pursue his passion. CAT provided him the opportunity to learn the skills needed to produce videos, and that along with his business degree had allowed him to help local businesses evolve at a similar pace that corporate businesses were able to evolve. He thanked the City for its support in the growing of CAT in the past and his personal life, and noted he thought there were likely other passionate people in the community that could also have their voices heard through CAT.
Mike Burden, 1011 Again Street, stated he was speaking on behalf of the Central Missouri Returned Peace Corps Volunteers (CMRPCV) and noted they had partnered with CAT for about five years. CAT had been instrumental in the growth of the Third Goal Film Fest, which was established to enhance cultural understanding. CAT had enabled them to bring in an upcoming film maker every year and had helped them professionalize their message to spread the word about the event. He explained CMRPCV had also recently made some films themselves, which he had taken to the National Peace Corps Association conference. He believed they would not have been as successful without the support of CAT, and urged the Council to continue to support CAT.
Jason Black, 1507 Waterford Drive, commented that he had heard a lot about the value of CAT to a lot of people, but noted they needed to understand the fact the City's resources were not unlimited. He believed the Council needed to determine whether the value added to the City by CAT outweighed what the City had to give up for it. He explained he was not questioning the value of CAT, but wondered if this was a resource the City government needed to provide or if it was a resource that should be provided by private donations or other sources. He reiterated the City's resources were limited and taxation of the local community was the only source of income. He thought they needed to question whether CAT was where they needed to focus their attention, energy, and resources when they did not have the budget to maintain all of the needs of the City.
Louis Wilson, 404 W. Broadway, explained he had attended the press conference on the City's Strategic Plan 2016-2019, and had been impressed by the fact the City recognized social equity as a goal of the Plan. He believed achieving a form of that goal would allow more people in Columbia to be empowered and to be economically activated. He also felt a thriving community that was socially empowered had the skills and training to fill local jobs and create entrepreneurial opportunities to grow in a way to better all lives, and asked that the Plan recognize the value of individual access to broadcast media and other forms of First Amendment expression. He pointed out the United States was different from many economies in the world in that they had a free flow of information, and countries without this had economies that struggled. He thought this effect was the same at the local level. He commented that he would champion CAT as it provided training and experience in video technology and studio experiences. It had vocational implications as those trained could get or make jobs as no one else in Columbia provided the same service. CAT as the public access television component of the public, educational, and governmental cable television network provided citizens access to the cable television network as a function of the inherent
7

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
First Amendment interests, which had been codified in the 1984 Cable Communications Policy Act. He encouraged the Council to support CAT today and in the future.
Kelley Lucero, 407 Sanford Avenue, stated she had been a member of CAT since 2011 due to her job with Central Missouri Community Action (CMCA), a non-profit that served eight counties in Mid-Missouri, and explained non-profits could generally not afford video services. She noted CMCA had initially used CAT to teach volunteers to produce videos, but she later decided to learn herself since all of the volunteers eventually left the organization. She stated she had taken several classes and had produced about a dozen videos for CMCA, and had also helped other non-profits produce videos with CAT's equipment. She pointed out she also made an hour long documentary about her father before he had passed away, which she would not have been able to do if she had not learned those skills from CAT. She believed CAT was one of the best resources in Columbia as anyone could go there to learn, and thought it was a great resource for at-risk students since it was of interest to them and they could see a future in it. She hoped the Council would honor the contract and continue funding CAT.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, asked the Council to support CAT as it provided a direct investment in entrepreneurial economic development in Columbia, and an investment that produced dramatic results as evidenced tonight. He also asked the Council to increase the sewer connection fee. He did not believe that was a barrier to creating affordable housing in Columbia as 80-90 percent of the benefit of lower fees would go to people purchasing $150,000 and higher houses. Very little would benefit those needing affordable housing. He felt keeping the fee low would subsidize the rich and derivative development, such as retail development or residential development. He noted HOME and CDBG funds could then be used to subsidize qualified low income housing projects.
Alan Mitchell stated he was the President of the Columbia Police Officers Association (CPOA) Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 26, and noted their organization represented close to 90 percent of the sworn personnel at the Columbia Police Department. He explained he was present to speak on B252-15, which would close hearings of the Personnel Advisory Board, and noted the CPOA was vehemently opposed to the proposed change. The CPOA did not feel the amendment would solve any problem, and believed it would only take away a valuable employee right. He understood City staff felt this amendment would protect employees, and questioned how since City employees currently had the right to have a closed hearing if they wished. He believed the employees were already protected. He understood City staff also felt the current ordinance was not in the City's best interest, and wondered how. He believed that would only be true if the City did something incorrectly or improperly, and the better solution would be to not do anything incorrectly or improperly instead of hiding it from the public. The National Association for Civilian Oversight of Law Enforcement had published a study that had indicated transparency reduced corruption and the possibility of corruption. In addition, accountability and transparency were signals of a strong institution and democratic governance. If improprieties of the system were discovered in the process, he felt the City should welcome the chance to fix those problems and to move the City forward. The police in Columbia were well accustomed to accountability and oversight as the Police Department had an extensive internal affairs system and the Citizens
8

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Police Review Board (CPRB) provided additional impartial oversight. He noted the CPRB operated in the open as well. He understood some had indicated other cities did not operate in this manner, and if that was true, he believed Columbia was ahead of its time with regard to this process. He reiterated that changing the ordinance did not solve any problems and only reduced the possibility of transparency in a day and age when transparency was becoming more and more important. He pointed out the employees were already protected under the existing ordinances. He asked the Council to not approve the change in the hearings of the Personnel Advisory Board as indicated in B252-15.
John Conway, 4902 Thornbrook Ridge, commented that he was present to support the passage of the Water and Light Department portion of the budget as the Water and Light Advisory Board (WLAB) had played an instrumental role in its development. He noted the 2016 fiscal year budget supported the long range planning goals of the Water and Light Department as was exemplified by reports completed or in the process of being completed by Carollo Engineering, Black & Veatch, and Jacobs Engineering. He noted the budget also supported the commissioning of the Water Integrated Resource Plan, which would assess demand and supply side practices. He thanked the Council for commissioning all of these reports.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, suggested the Council support the request of the CPOA. He was happy to hear there would be more jobs at the City and asked how many would be at a minimum pay. Mr. Blattel replied none. Mr. Elkin stated he thought that was good news. He commented that it appeared a small investment was monumental in terms of CAT. He asked about new household hazardous waste and whether it would be relocated. If it was to be relocated, he thought that should be done carefully so debris did not fall on the streets.
Tyree Byndom commented that at the time of the dissolution of the Enhanced Enterprise Zone (EEZ) ordinance, Mayor McDavid had challenged the audience to create a solution to the challenges in the community. He took that challenge personally by creating a consulting firm that offered strategies to highlight efforts to achieve minority inclusion, social and economic equity, etc. He noted the black community had reached out to former Mayor Darwin Hindman to express their feelings and displeasure about the lack of inclusion and the troubled relationships between black and whites and the Columbia Police Department. A task force report at that time had offered 28 recommendations, but those recommendations were never acted upon. During the observance of the celebration of the Sharp End, Mayor McDavid had indicated the black community was resilient and that they should keep situations in the community that had led to the demise of Sharp End from happening again. He noted many felt those conditions were in existence now. He stated there was less than one percent minority leadership in any position in Columbia so there were some definite issues. He explained the Sharp End land and businesses would have been valued at over $2 million in the 1950's, and today the land had a collective value of over $2 billion. This did not include the emotional or cultural value of the village lost. He commented that money was used to create housing authority projects instead of aiding individuals in rebuilding and repairing their homes and connect sewers to their homes. He pointed out 60 percent of the African-Americans in Columbia had convictions due to the lack of inclusion and opportunity
9

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
and discriminatory practices. He recommended the City invest into the local human capital by creating a social development process that would work in conjunction with the economic engines already in place. He suggested the $4 million in savings be invested in this effort and for $50,000 to be provided to CAT.
Roger Fries, 3512 Hedgewood Drive, stated he would sleep a lot better if he had an extra patrol car traveling through his neighborhood than the ability to watch a movie on the CAT station.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing.
The vote on B221-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
The vote on B222-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
Mr. Thomas understood the parking fee changes would be effective on January 1, 2016, and suggested they honor the request of the Downtown Community Improvement District (CID) to delay approving the fee increases until after the parking workshop was held tomorrow and Wednesday in case any new strategies were formed resulting in a change to these fees. He asked if tabling this item would affect the budget. Ms. Peveler replied tabling this would require an amendment to the budget, and stated she was unsure of a dollar amount. Ms. Nauser pointed out they could pass this and amend it later if necessary. Mr. Matthes recommended they move in that manner if they were comfortable. Mr. Thomas stated he was fine with that recommendation.
The vote on B223-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
Ms. Nauser understood Mr. Lindner of the Forum Group had spoken at a previous meeting questioning these rates and that staff had planned to look into his concerns. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and explained they would follow up with him as an individual customer. He did not believe there was a reason to change the system at this time. Mayor McDavid pointed out an amendment to this could also be done later if necessary.
The vote on B224-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
Mayor McDavid commented that he disagreed with the analysis of Mr. Thomas as he felt 90 percent of user fees went toward the maintenance of the system, and only 10 percent went toward the treatment plant. He believed the sewer connection fee increase would affect supply and demand economics, and that affordability was the reason many employees lived outside of the City limits. He noted home building was booming in Hallsville and Ashland, and believed the high costs to build in Columbia were the reasons. He understood an
10

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
increase to $2,400 was wanted by some on the Council, and pointed out the next highest city in Missouri was St. Louis at $1,072, and after that the next highest was at $500. He noted the costs of capitalization were recouped by user fees in many communities, such as Moberly, Mexico, Fulton, and Kansas City, as there were no sewer connection fees. He commented that the best way to slow growth in Columbia was to spike fees for new houses. He stated it would likely not affect $800,000 homes, but would affect more affordable homes. He noted he would vote against this sewer connection fee increase.
Mr. Thomas stated he planned to support this sewer connection fee increase. Between 2004 and 2013, the City had collected $6.5 million in sewer connection fees, but had spent $24.4 million on new sewer infrastructure to simply accommodate new growth in Columbia. This eliminated all maintenance and rehabilitation projects of the sewer system, such as inflow and infiltration. The sewer connection fee only covered about 27 percent of the cost of growth, and the rest was funded by the sewer rates. He believed that was an inequitable and illogical system. It underpriced new homes and made it more difficult for existing residents of Columbia to sell their homes because they were competing with artificially undervalued new homes. He commented that he was not against growth in Columbia, and noted a study in Florida had indicated increases in connection and impact fees did not change growth patterns. He also agreed with John Clark, who had indicated earlier tonight that this was not necessarily the kind of primary growth they wanted to encourage. He noted they wanted to bring in employers. He stated people already wanted to live here. He noted the recommendation they were following for phasing in the fee increase from $800 to $2,400 had come from a study conducted by Burton and Associates, and they had slowed down the time frame to reach the $2,400 considerably. The increase to $2,400 would take them to 75-80 percent of the cost of expanding sewer infrastructure to accommodate new growth. Although he did not believe much of the new development in Columbia involved affordable homes, he did not want to discourage it, so he planned to ask staff to provide recommendations to either exempt or discount the sewer connection fee for federally defined affordable homes. He hoped Council would support this sewer fee increase as it was the right thing to do.
Ms. Nauser commented that she would not support an increase to the proposed amount as she did not feel the fee in Columbia should be higher than the fee charged by Boone County. She believed the study in Florida involved metropolitan areas and areas where vast amounts of farmland was not available for people to live. People here could reside right across the City limits. In Florida, they would be in another metropolitan area that had similar costs. They did not have the competition that Columbia had. She felt it was poor policy to have the highest fee in Missouri, and that comparison communities with similar rates included Boulder, Colorado, Columbus, Ohio, Ann Arbor, Michigan, Lawrence, Kansas, and other communities that were not even within Missouri. She understood the national trend was a decrease in development and home building, and did not believe it was good policy to rely on connection fees to balance the budget. Building costs for improvements and growth into the rate structure would create a steadier income stream, and the costs would be spread out so they were lower for all rate payers. She commented that she believed in paying into the system, but did not feel they should make themselves the highest place to do business as
11

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
that would not result in a continued rate of return. She believed growth helped the economy, and noted she would be agreeable to increasing the sewer connection fee to only $1,400 since that was comparable to the fee in Boone County.
Mr. Skala agreed there were benefits to growth, but noted there were also costs associated with growth that had to be considered. He stated they had discussed a cost recovery plan last year, and had decided to phase this increase in over a period of three years. This was the second year of that plan. He understood they might lose some development if the fee was too high, but at this point he believed the increase would be beneficial. He agreed this increase would affect supply and demand, and thought they were debating to what extent it would be affected. He did not believe the housing boom in Hallsville could be directly connected to the anticipation of an increase in sewer connection fees as there were many variables. He suggested they move forward with the plan they had agreed to last year in order to account for some of the rising costs. He pointed out they had always subsidized growth to some degree in Columbia, and would continue to subsidize growth to some degree.
Mr. Trapp stated this was a rate neutral plan because these new costs would not have to be included in the rates. It was net equal in terms of overall affordability for those that lived in Columbia. He commented that Ms. Nauser and Mayor McDavid had made some fair points in that they needed to watch overall costs so they did not get too far out of step in terms of driving development to the County and surrounding communities. This was the reason they decided to phase in the increase to $2,400 over many years, and why it was a modest increase of only $400. This allowed other communities to look at what Columbia was doing. He explained Columbia was a leader in many ways in Missouri, and many of the communities with similar rates were leaders and cultural centers in their states. They were the communities that looked into questions of equity. He understood there was a gestalt within the community that wanted to see more of the costs of new development attached to new development, which he thought should be considered to the extent possible since it created a sense of fairness, but noted it had to be balanced with reasonable changes that fit within the local context. He believed this increase continued to do that, and suggested it be evaluated every year because if they continued to see a decline in building permits or other changes, they might want to hold off and give the region a chance to adjust.
The vote on B225-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, PETERS. VOTING NO: MCDAVID, NAUSER. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B250-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B251-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
12

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Mayor McDavid commented that people outside of government believed employees in government could not be fired. He felt in the mix of employees and employers, there were bad employees in every profession, and he could not imagine wanting personnel issues addressed in a public setting. He thought the police, who he honored, were getting bad advice from the lawyer who ran the CPOA. He commented that he had been on hospital quality assurance boards where they sometimes took privileges away and had been a consultant for the Missouri State Board of Healing Arts where investigations were conducted, and those processes were all confidential. He felt those in the wrong would more likely admit to it in a confidential meeting than in a public meeting, and as a result, the problem would be addressed. He did not believe there was any reason for open evaluations unless the party wanted to create an adversarial relationship, which he thought would get in the way of what could be a positive and open relationship where expectations could be clarified, problems could be remedied, and rehabilitation could occur without the employee having an open legacy. He stated he would vote in favor of B252-15 because he could not understand the concept of public criticism in employee performance.
Mr. Skala stated he agreed with Mayor McDavid in that he did not know why anyone would want an open session, but was also concerned about re-establishing public trust and did not see any harm in continuing to allow an employee to have an open meeting even though he felt it was a bad idea. He commented that he was worried about someone wanting an open meeting in order to create a spectacle, but did not see any reason to move to a more confidential or secret process at this time. Generally speaking, openness and transparency along with public trust was paramount. He noted he would oppose this part of the B252-15.
Mr. Thomas commented that he believed transparency was extremely important in government, especially in Columbia at the present time. He did not feel he could vote in favor of this in the current environment of distrust, and thought the only way he could support it was if everyone was supportive of it. He acknowledged the normal personnel practice was to keep these things private, and did not understand why someone would want it to be public. He noted they had only heard from one of the three employee groups, and that group was opposed to this change. He explained he did not see what the City had to gain from taking away a choice the employee currently had, and stated he would vote against this portion of the ordinance.
Mr. Ruffin understood the process was private except for this one section, which was public. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct. Ms. Buckner noted this portion was only public if the employee chose for it to be public. Mr. Ruffin understood it was private until this one point of decision. Mr. Matthes explained it was private until this hearing, and the decision was then private as well.
Ms. Thompson commented that the complicating factor from the legal point of view was that most personnel issues might not involve a single employee, and if there was more than one employee involved, the other employee could not block it from being open. One employee could make a choice for another so it could be manipulated.
Mr. Skala noted that was a little troubling because he did not want the process to be manipulated. He wondered if it could be written so everyone involved had to be agreeable to a public hearing. Ms. Thompson pointed out hearings involved witnesses and others so it
13

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
would be very difficult to craft appropriate language. Mr. Skala understood this impacted only the employee, and felt consensus was a simple solution if more than one employee was involved. Ms. Thompson explained it was not typically that straightforward. The employment matter was specific to the employee as group employment actions were not done, but there could be peripheral involvement. She gave the example of a public safety incident as more than one officer usually responded to a situation. If 3-4 officers were taking action, they would all be witnesses and only some might be affected by disciplinary actions.
Mr. Matthes pointed out a worst case scenario would involve a sexual harassment complaint. The employee might want the hearing to be public, but the person that was complaining about the harassment might not want it to be public.
Ms. Buckler explained personnel records were closed under the Sunshine Law, and with a public hearing, the media and others tended to want copies of files, which the City would not provide. This did not block the employee from providing the media any records or saying whatever he or she wanted while the City continued to say nothing, so it became a one-sided situation.
Mr. Thomas understood the open hearings tended to tie the hands of the City in terms of what information could be presented to the Personnel Advisory Board during the hearing. Ms. Buckler explained it limited the ability to give documents to all of the people of the press that wanted them. It was very confusing to the media. She noted she agreed with the comment of Ms. Thompson in that it could create some uncomfortable situations when other employees had to come before the Board and testify in an open hearing. The employee subject to the hearing was not the only one impacted as those that had to testify were also affected. Mr. Thomas understood it could distort the fairness of the hearing. Ms. Buckner explained hearings were difficult situations in general and volunteers served on the Personnel Advisory Board. She noted she needed good personnel people to apply, and many people did not want to apply.
Mr. Skala commented that his initial thought had been no harm, no foul, but he now understood there was the potential for harm. He noted he was still concerned about the perception of the public that the City was trying to reduce the amount of transparency.
Mr. Thomas understood there had been five cases of an employee electing to have an open hearing, and asked if there had been a situation of another employee having to testify and being uncomfortable with doing so in the public. Ms. Buckler replied she could not speak to specific situations.
Mr. Matthes commented that if an employee behaved badly someone else was likely involved, and there was a huge amount of pressure on that other person. He noted that although it was their professional opinion that it was best to close the hearings, it was okay if Council chose not to do it.
Mr. Thomas asked if the Personnel Advisory Board had expressed an opinion on this issue. Ms. Buckler replied they had been given the information and were asked for comments, and no one objected or commented about any of the changes proposed to Chapter 19.
Mr. Thomas stated he was inclined to want to table this decision to allow more time to think it over and for the other employee associations or the Personnel Advisory Board to
14

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
provide their thoughts. Mayor McDavid commented that he would oppose tabling the issue because he felt they were capable of making the decision tonight.
Mr. Matthes pointed out the real open process came after the City's disciplinary process, and the City's process was administrative except for that one piece. If there was still disagreement, the issue could be taken to court, and that was where everything was public.
Mr. Trapp commented that this was a very difficult decision as there was strength and validity in the cases stated by both Mayor McDavid and Mr. Skala. He thought they all wanted to be able to grant the request of any work group when possible, and the CPOA was asking to continue the option of an open hearing, but he also felt they needed to weigh how personnel decisions were made in almost every other institution. He noted even their own deliberations for the three employees that reported to them were private. He stated he had been undecided about this issue, and explained they sometimes they had to choose between the greater harm. In this situation, they risked harming their relationship with the CPOA and police officers because they would not feel supported, or they risked continuing a problematic personnel policy that violated human resources best practices and could create huge potentialities in terms of a negative impact on the City or its employees. He agreed it was a vote they could make tonight as he did not believe there would be any new information or consensus on this matter in the community. He noted he planned to support this without any amendments.
Mr. Thomas stated he would like to delay a decision on this particular issue for a couple of weeks. He understood a lot of new information would likely not come forward, but he had absorbed new information tonight and wanted time to process it.
Mr. Thomas made a motion to amend B252-15 by striking the proposed changes to Section 19-239. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala.
Mr. Skala commented that he was now leaning toward the opposite direction than previously on this subject, but still believed it was reasonable to delay a decision on the issue in case they were provided another perspective.
The motion made by Mr. Thomas and seconded by Mr. Skala to amend B252-15 by striking the proposed changes to Section 19-239 was defeated by voice vote with only Mr. Skala, Mr. Thomas, and Ms. Peters voting in favor of it.
B252-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B253-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
Mayor McDavid stated he thought CAT was a great organization and wanted them to be successful, but noted the Police Department was 30 percent understaffed and the Fire Department was 25 percent understaffed. In addition, the City was not fixing its roads in a timely fashion, and a decision to fund CAT $50,000 meant that $50,000 was not going toward community policing. He commented that the Council had been begging CAT to become selfsufficient for the past four years, and thought they were close.
15

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Mayor McDavid made a motion to amend the amendment sheet associated with B22015 to transfer $50,000 from CAT to community policing. The motion failed for the lack of a second.
Mr. Thomas understood all of the items on the amendment sheet associated with B220-15 were changes to the City Manager's proposed budget that had been published a couple of months ago, and that staff wanted these items that had come up since that time to be built into that budget. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and explained many of the changes were due to the passage of the capital improvement sales tax ballot.
Mr. Thomas noted there were several items under net general fund impact, and asked for clarification. Ms. Peveler replied the net general impact of all of those changes was $0. Mr. Thomas understood the public improvement fund had $1.2 million associated with it and asked for clarification. Ms. Peveler replied that was outside of the general fund, and had to do with the ballot issue. She explained the City accumulated development fees and then allocated them to projects, and now that they knew the projects, they also knew what portion of the development fees were needed to support those projects, so that was the amount they needed to pull from the public improvement fund to the capital improvements fund to help fund the projects. She noted the projects were not fully funded by the capital improvement sales tax. Mr. Blattel stated the reason they had to wait until the capital improvement sales tax ballot passed was because certain funds used for capital improvements could only be used for specific purposes. He explained the money the City received from Boone County for county roads could only be used for roads as an example and pointed out the public improvement fund could be used for sidewalks, streets, etc. They looked at all of the projects the City promised would be done and matched them with funds that had specific purposes first. They then looked at the funds that could be used for more than one purpose to complete the allocations for those projects. Mr. Thomas asked how much money from the projected capital improvement sales tax revenues was now being put into the budget for projects and which projects were those funds going toward. Ms. Peveler replied the list of projects were on the second and third pages of the amendment sheet.
Ms. Peters asked for clarification with regard to the economic development item on the amendment sheet. Ms. Peveler replied the budget originally had the transfer coming directly from the Convention and Visitors Bureau to Economic Development, but due to the way the agreement was written, the money needed to come from REDI and not the Convention and Visitors Bureau. The money would be given to REDI who in turn would give it to Economic Development. Mr. Matthes stated it was equivalent to a typographical error as there was no real change. Mr. Skala understood it identified a pathway.
Mr. Thomas asked for clarification regarding the council reserve fund. He understood it used to be $100,000 per year, and that they were funding CAT with it. He did not feel that was the role of the council reserve fund. Mr. Matthes explained it had been $100,000, and was reduced in a year where every service line was cut by two percent, which left it at $98,000. CAT had the unfortunate luck of a contract expiring the year $1.9 million was cut from the budget. Their continued support was initially funded with savings for the first year, and the second extension came from two years of council reserves. The $50,000 was a third extension that had also been funded with council reserves.
16

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp stated he would like to see the council reserve fund revert back to $98,000 next year or at least $73,000 if they decided to provide CAT a further step down of $25,000. He understood CAT was making good progress in developing other funding sources and that their budget was not much smaller than when the City was giving them $200,000. He noted this was not an issue of the worthiness of CAT or how meaningful they were to the community, but a matter of how it related to other budget priorities. He recalled they had decided to fund CAT with council reserve funds so it did not come from money needed to deal with pay compression, etc. He stated he had been happy to help CAT to become fully supported with other funding, and agreed there were other venues of City support, such as arts funding, economic development funding through CDBG funds, etc. The City had a vetted process for funding agencies, and did not fund much of these from the general fund. He understood cable franchise fees were a small source of the general revenue fund, but those funds had been decreasing. He had wanted CAT advocates to consider revenue sources and compensating cuts. He noted he could live with council reserves to fund CAT this year, but wanted it to be more substantial next year so they had the flexibility to fund important opportunities or critical needs that had not been pre-identified. He provided the time the City provided Job Point with critical bridge funding for its YouthBuild program, which provided job training for at-risk youth, as an example. Since Job Point had maintained their capacity, they were able to get their federal funding back, and the program continued to exist and thrive. He noted the City would not be able to do something similar this year because there was only $48,000 in council reserve. He reiterated he thought they needed to reduce funding to CAT and build the council reserve fund back up next year so they were able to address community crises and needs, emerging issues, etc.
Mr. Thomas commented that he agreed they needed to build the council reserve fund back to $100,000, but was not sure they should step CAT down to $0. He understood the general fund received $600,000 per year from the cable franchise fee, and the Council had allocated $200,000 to CAT in 2008 for five years. He believed that was based on a broadcast communications philosophy of public, education, and government. He understood that philosophy was less strong now, and that there was no legal requirement for the recipient of franchise fees to fund public access, but many did. He thought they needed to consider the value of a new community relations director position that had been created by the City at $150,000 against the value of providing CAT $50,000 per year. He stated he did not want to give an impression that he was ready to completely cut funding for CAT as the believed the City's support of CAT was an important statement and lifeline to an organization that did so much good in the community.
Mr. Skala stated he believed CAT had tremendous value in the community, and noted he was inclined to want to discuss the suggestion of Mr. Trapp, but was leaning toward the argument of Mr. Thomas in that this should be a discussion of priorities. He thought they could argue this was economic development because it was in many ways. He noted he wanted to have the discussion in the next year.
Ms. Nauser explained the City had originally planned to cut funding for CAT when it was still suffering from the impacts of the recession, but had entered into an agreement to fund a portion of what they had previously been provided annually. She commented that
17

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
each year, they continued to renegotiate new agreements. She stated franchise fees were part of the general revenue so those funds were not dedicated to a specific item. The tax base was declining due to internet sales, so the City was trying to do more with less per capita. She explained she was not necessarily opposed to funding CAT, but felt they needed to compete with other cultural entities in the community. She did not believe it was fair to fund one cultural entity by a line item as there were other good entities as well. She noted she did not like this funding coming from the council reserve fund as that was money that could be used for emergency services, but would support funding this year due to the existing agreement.
Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend B220-15 per the amendment sheet dated September 21, 2015. The motion was seconded by Mr. Ruffin and approved unanimously by voice vote.
The vote on B220-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
OLD BUSINESS
B238-15 Approving the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 located on the northwest corner of Strawn Road (Route ZZ) and West Broadway; authorizing a performance contract; granting variances from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction and direct driveway access; setting forth conditions for approval.
The bill was given third reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood the topography made the sidewalk on the west side of Strawn Road very expensive or impossible to build, and asked if there was a sidewalk on the east side. Mr. Teddy replied no, and explained the nearest sidewalk on Strawn Road was north of Worley Street where it connected to the sidewalk on Worley Street. Mr. Thomas asked what the topography was like on the east side of Strawn Road, and wondered if they could ask the subdivider to build a sidewalk along that side to provide some pedestrian access. Mr. Teddy replied staff had not investigated that, and noted he would be curious to know what might occur with those lots adjacent to that area because they would be obligated to construct a sidewalk if they subdivided. He commented that the Bellwood Subdivision had a complete street system with internal sidewalks that fed into a crosswalk north of Worley Street that gave access to the sidewalk. It was a much larger scale of development, which justified the off-site improvement due to providing a route to school and routes between neighborhoods. This would likely be two single-family homes, or there could be an institutional use on Lot 2, but it would be small in scale. Mr. Thomas stated he believed the area included a lot of pedestrian generators and destinations. Mr. Teddy explained staff considered whether there was a meaningful connection, and any building on those lots would be oriented elsewhere so they questioned where individuals would cross Strawn Road. Mr. Thomas asked about people needing to get to one end of Strawn Road to the other. Mr. Teddy agreed it would benefit others. Mr. Thomas commented that he was looking at it from a systems approach, and believed it was a critical connector road. He stated the policy of constructing sidewalks
18

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
with platting or the development of an undeveloped lot was designed to look at the network connection. Mr. Teddy explained since staff did not conduct that analysis, he did not know what would be involved with a sidewalk on the east side in terms of right-of-way, topography, etc.
Phebe La Mar, an attorney with offices at 11 S. Ninth Street, commented that she was present on behalf of the applicant, Jesse Martin, and noted her client had a two tract property at the northwest corner of Strawn Road/Route ZZ and Broadway. The right-of-way already owned by the City for one-half of the extension of Scott Boulevard was adjacent to the western boundary line of the property. She explained they were requesting a sidewalk variance because the topography and cost-analysis did not allow for building a sidewalk along Strawn Road. She understood Mr. Thomas was inquiring about sidewalk construction on the east side of Strawn Road, and pointed out the Bellwood Subdivision involved a lot of lots so the cost of the sidewalk on the other side was spread out among many different people. In this situation, there would likely be only one or two houses, so it would increase the cost of development of these lots in ways that were not manageable. She did not believe it made sense to require off-site improvements in this case. She explained they were also asking for the use of a driveway over the right-of-way that would access Broadway as there was no other method of access to a public street. She noted they would not develop this property to the extent it could be developed, and were only asking to place one house on Lot 1 and potentially another house on Lot 2. She asked the Council to grant the right of use agreement and to consider providing access to Lot 2. She noted she did not understand until today that City staff was not recommending any driveway access to Lot 2, and pointed out the lot could not really be used for anything without a driveway. She asked Council to allow a driveway for a single-family residence on that lot, and noted the lots were large enough for a circle drive so people would not have to back out on to the public road.
Mr. Thomas asked Ms. La Mar if she would be open to negotiating a payment in lieu of not building a sidewalk on Strawn Road. Ms. La Mar replied it would depend upon the amount of money. Mr. Thomas thought a per foot figure had been used for a property on the Business Loop recently. Ms. Thompson explained that was not a payment in lieu of situation. It was a payment that went into escrow for future construction when the anticipated roadway improvements were completed.
Ms. La Mar commented that these situations were very different as one was a commercial development on a busy street while the other was two-family residential home development. She noted the variance ordinance presented the methodology by which the City was to determine whether a variance was warranted, and this particular property met every criterion for what would warrant a variance. The topography would not allow for it and an ADA compliant sidewalk would likely not be able to be built due to the difference in elevation. In addition, the cost would be out of line from what an ordinary sidewalk would cost. As a result, she was not sure requiring a payment in lieu of or building a sidewalk in a location that would not be used by this property was the right course of action.
Mr. Thomas commented that he did not believe staff would have supported the variance request if the topography had not been an issue, and noted the length was due to the design of the lot. Ms. La Mar agreed, but pointed out the ordinance set out the
19

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
methodology for determining if a variance was warranted, and City staff and others agreed this particular piece of property warranted a variance.
Mr. Trapp asked if a circle drive could be required so people did not back out onto the roadway. Mr. Teddy replied it would have to be included in the ordinance. He noted they could require a circle drive or something with a three point turnaround as it would be sufficient for a residence. Ms. La Mar stated she thought her client would be agreeable. Mr. Trapp understood this would require an amendment in addition to the amendment sheet.
Ms. Nauser asked to be shown where the Bellwood Subdivision was in comparison to these lots. Mr. Teddy replied it was the north portion of Lot 1. Ms. Nauser understood that would not be the route considering the easement the City had from the Bellwood Subdivision was along the east boundary line. Mr. Teddy explained the diagrams were conceptual in nature and only showed travel from point A to point B without pre-determining an alignment. Ms. Nauser stated she was looking at the future in terms of easements for when the property was developed. Mr. Teddy explained staff was trying to protect the right-of-way so the property owner did not build too close to the side lot line as the City would then have to purchase a house when the road was constructed.
Mr. Trapp stated he had met with the applicant and his attorney, and they were in the position of having three roads that did not allow access. The applicant wanted to build a house on fairly good sized lot so they would respect the existing the topography. He noted they felt the City was forcing them into a land bank by denying the variances so the property would remain undeveloped and the Scott Boulevard extension could be run through the subject property. He explained he did not feel that was fair or reasonable since the City already had right-of-way on the other side. He understood the staff and Planning and Zoning Commission had recommended the sidewalk variance, and the property met the criteria for that variance. The real issue was the driveway variance to access the limited access roads. Since driveways were not allowed, they would have to build a road to access the main road, which meant they would have to further subdivide the lot and build more houses to pay for the road. As a result, he did not believe the City gained anything with a road versus a couple of driveways.
Mr. Trapp explained he would like to make a motion to amend B238-15 to allow driveway access on Lot 2 with the provision for a circle drive or a three point turnaround.
Ms. Thompson explained Section 5 provided for direct residential driveway access onto Strawn Road for Lot 2, so they would only need to add "provided that the driveway shall be constructed with a paved area of sufficient size and design to provide for vehicles to turn around and enter Strawn Road without backing into the roadway."
Ms. Amin asked if one of the notes on the amendment sheet for Section 6 would need to change. Mr. Teddy agreed the note would contradict that language.
Mayor McDavid made a motion to table B238-15 to later in the meeting, after discussion on B272-15, to allow for appropriate amending language to be prepared. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
20

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
B255-15 Approving the Final Replat of Landmark Subdivision ­ Plat 3 located on the south side of McAlester Street and the north side of Country Club Drive; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas asked for an explanation for the recommendation of staff to deny the variance. Mr. Teddy replied the denial was based upon the letter of the policy. He displayed a view of the proposed lot, and explained they felt there was fairly flat topography and nothing that would physically prohibit a sidewalk. He noted it was also in a developed area. He agreed it was along a low traffic local street without sidewalks and that there were not major pedestrian generators nearby, which were reasons to support the variance. Mr. Thomas understood there were four separate categories by which staff measured requests for variances, and in this instance, they had supported two and did not support the other two. He asked how that translated that into an overall recommendation. Mr. Teddy replied it was a judgement call. He noted there could be a connection of Alfred Drive to Old 63 in the future. He explained he thought the Planning and Zoning Commission had been persuaded by the consistency argument in that the Council should grant the variance again since they had granted it a couple of years ago. Mr. Thomas stated he would not oppose this variance request, but noted he really wanted to work toward sidewalk districts similar to what existed in Austin, Texas. This would allow money to be placed in a district fund if a property owner did not want to build a sidewalk or there was another issue so they could address sidewalk gaps. B255-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B261-15 Authorizing an STP-Urban Program supplemental agreement with the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission for the Providence Road improvement project from Stadium Boulevard to Stewart Road.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser commented that many of her constituents were anxious to see this project move forward so she was concerned about a delay. Mr. Nichols explained it looked like a delay, but it really only provided a longer window to get the project done. He noted he anticipated the consultant providing right-of-plans in October, which would then allow them to start negotiations. He stated they would come to Council with an easement acquisition ordinance once those properties were described. He commented that staff was concerned it might take time to obtain the easements. Ms. Nauser asked if actual construction would start in 2017. Mr. Nichols replied traffic was a lot less in the summer so it was more ideal. He explained they could move the schedule up if they had been able to acquire the properties more quickly, but he was not confident that would happen. Ms. Nauser understood the acquisition of easements on Turner had put them back six months. Mr. Nichols stated that
21

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
was correct, but noted they were able to save quite a bit of money by ensuring those easements were dedicated through the platting process.
B261-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B272-15 Appropriating FY 2014 General Fund savings for projects identified by the City Council as part of the Incentive Based Budgeting Initiative.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Trapp made a motion to table discussion on B272-15 until after discussion on B238-15. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote.
B238-15 Approving the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 located on the northwest corner of Strawn Road (Route ZZ) and West Broadway; authorizing a performance contract; granting variances from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction and direct driveway access; setting forth conditions for approval.
The bill was read by the Clerk. Ms. Thompson explained that assuming the Council would consent to having driveway access for Lot 2 on Broadway as opposed to Strawn Road, which was now the request of the applicant, she noted Section 5 of the proposed bill would need to be amended. Item 1 under Section 6 of the amendment sheet would also need to be amended so driveway access was prohibited on only Strawn Road, and not Broadway. Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend B238-15 by changing Section 5 so it read "subdivider is granted a variance from the requirements of Section 25-53(4) of the Subdivision Regulations to allow Lot 2 within the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 to have direct residential driveway access on Broadway; provided that, the driveway shall be constructed with a paved area of sufficient size and design to provide for vehicles to turn around and enter Broadway without backing into the roadway" and to amend the amendment sheet associated with B238-15 so subsection 1 of Section 6 read " a note shall be added to the final plat indicating that Lot 2 is prohibited from taking driveway access onto Strawn Road (Route ZZ) for the purpose of residential development, per section 25-53(4) of the City Code and that Lot 1 is prohibited from taking driveway access onto Broadway, Strawn Road (Route ZZ), for the purpose of residential development, per section 25-53(4) of the City Code, except as provided in the manner set forth in a Right of Use Permit Agreement executed between the City and the owner of Lot 1." The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. Mayor McDavid made a motion to amend B238-15 per the amended amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote. The vote on B238-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
22

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
B272-15 Appropriating FY 2014 General Fund savings for projects identified by the City Council as part of the Incentive Based Budgeting Initiative.
The bill was given third reading by the Clerk. Mr. Matthes provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser stated she had recommended the $10,000 for community policing, and anticipated it being used for programming, such as community activities in which they wanted citizen engagement. She did not want it to be used for overtime. Mayor McDavid made a motion to amend B272-15 by transferring the $100,000 for Strategic Plan Implementation ­ Miscellaneous Contractual to Strategic Plan ­ Community Policing Activities. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser. Mr. Skala stated he did not believe there was any issue with spending $100,000 for community policing, and understood this was a way to specifically earmark the money for that particular purpose. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct, and one idea was for officers to teach children how to safely ride bikes. It was still about public safety, but did not involve enforcement. Ms. Nauser did not believe it made sense to have $10,000 set aside for community policing in one location and another $100,000 set aside elsewhere. Mr. Matthes asked if they wanted $110,000 or $100,000 for community policing. Mr. Trapp replied he was agreeable to $100,000. Mr. Skala thought that was reasonable. Ms. Nauser stated she wanted components of the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence to be evaluated and addressed with these community policing funds, especially as the Police Department embarked upon its strategic planning process. She wanted to ensure there was community outreach and citizens could voice their opinions. She thought they needed to study re-entry issues to see how they could implement some items. She noted those were conditions for her vote in favor of the $100,000 for community policing. Mr. Matthes commented that he thought the next step was to conduct some robust research on those topics, and this funding would help. Mr. Ruffin understood the City was not at a point of being ready to implement specific projects or programs recommended by the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and that more research was needed. Mr. Matthes stated the Task Force had done some good research on their own, and the City now had to determine what might work in Columbia. It was not a matter of whether they should move forward with some of the recommendations, but a matter of what might be best. Mr. Ruffin stated he sensed frustration in the community as many wanted to see some action as opposed to more meetings and research. He wanted to ensure they did not lose the opportunity to initiate a program within the coming year. Mr. Matthes explained staff was preparing a report to Council as quite a bit of work had occurred, such as ban the box, but he agreed more work was left to be done. Mr. Skala noted some information would come from the NLC Conference in Nashville as a group was specifically dedicated to racial equity issues. Mr. Thomas stated he shared the concerns of Mr. Ruffin, and pointed out they could earmark the $100,000 for community policing components from the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence or solely for the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. He noted a question that had been asked was
23

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
whether any money had been allocated to implement those recommendations, and this would provide a clear answer of yes.
Mayor McDavid commented that many people did not believe the City spent enough money on policing, so he would hate to remove the word policing as an identifier. Mr. Thomas agreed there was a lot of overlap. Mayor McDavid stated he wanted to be able to say they added $100,000 to community policing, and allow staff to determine how that fit with the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence.
Mr. Matthes explained the $50,000 for strategic plan implementation had been intended to develop a violence interruption service of some kind, and this $100,000 would be a greater catalyst.
Ms. Nauser noted money had been budgeted for other related items, and it was just hard to find it in the budget. She provided the increase in overtime funds to place school resource officers in the middle schools as an example, and pointed out that was a specific recommendation of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. Funding Cradle to Career would help obtain metrics and data and would help with the collaboration of government and non-profit agencies, which was associated with Task Force recommendations.
Mr. Thomas understood the motion was to put $100,000 toward community policing activities. Mayor McDavid stated that was correct, and clarified that his motion was to amend B272-15 so Strategic Plan ­ Community Policing Activities was funded $100,000 and for the necessary funds to come from Strategic Plan Implementation ­ Miscellaneous Contractual. Ms. Nauser, who seconded the initial motion, was agreeable.
The motion made by Mayor McDavid and seconded by Ms. Nauser to amend B272-15 by allocating $100,000 to Strategic Plan ­ Community Policing Activities, and for those funds to come from Strategic Plan Implementation ­ Miscellaneous Contractual, was approved unanimously by voice vote.
Mr. Thomas asked how much was now unallocated. Mr. Matthes replied $28,000. Mr. Thomas stated he wanted to allocate a maximum of $21,500 for an affordable housing symposium, which he and others had been working on. He noted the symposium was expected to be held December 3-4, 2015 and the funds would be used for professional facilitators, the marketing of the event, and travel expenses for the visiting speakers. Mr. Matthes suggested the motion be for $28,000 unless anyone had other uses in mind as travel could be unpredictable. Mr. Thomas made a motion to amend B272-15 so $28,000 was allocated for the affordable housing symposium. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp. Mayor McDavid commented that he loved Boulder, Colorado, but was concerned about bringing someone in from that community to talk about affordable housing as he could not afford to live there. He listed the average cost of homes in surrounding communities, which ranged from $95,000 in Mexico, Missouri to $166,000 in Jefferson City, Missouri, and noted Columbia was at $233,000. This was one of the reasons half of the workforce did not live in Columbia. He pointed out the average listing price in Boulder, Colorado was $1,001,000. It was an elite community with a black population of one percent. He noted he
24

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
could be convinced, but was skeptical of someone from Boulder being able to teach them about affordable housing.
Mr. Thomas explained Randy Cole, the affordable housing expert on City staff, had spoken highly of the program in Boulder, and noted they had a policy that development had to include a component of affordable housing or the developer had to pay into an affordable housing subsidy fund, which had raised $19 million.
Mayor McDavid stated he believed those were price control developments, which he considered to be a huge tax, and thought this would be great for existing Columbia homeowners because the value of their homes would likely increase. He commented that inclusionary housing had been around for decades and likely worked in areas of very high demand where there was a lot of wealth, but believed inclusionary zoning would stop growth in Columbia.
Mr. Thomas stated he was not proposing the passage of inclusionary zoning. The person from Boulder would be invited to tell them about a strategy that had been very effective over the last several years in creating affordable housing units in a community that did not have many affordable homes.
Mr. Skala suggested they reserve judgement until after the person speaks, and believed they could learn a lot regardless of the person delivering the information. In addition, they did not have to use the advice of this person if he did not have anything to offer.
Mr. Trapp pointed out it would only be one presentation of a larger symposium, and there would also be a speaker from Missoula, Montana, which he felt was a fairly comparable community to Columbia. He noted the intent was to bring the community together to learn of a range of solutions so they could then move forward on those items with consensus.
The motion made by Mr. Thomas and seconded by Mr. Trapp to amend B272-15 so $28,000 was allocated for the affordable housing symposium was approved unanimously by voice vote.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, stated he was glad they were asking for money to plan this summit, but noted he was somewhat concerned about the summit since the result would likely be a strategy for new buildings. He hoped the result would be a policy instead as it would also address how to maintain existing affordable housing, trailer parks, building codes in terms of insulation, transportation availability, and breaking up income segregation. Mr. Clark stated he was happy $100,000 would go toward community policing, but was concerned the focus of the strategic plan was on geographic policing, which was not community policing. He thought geographic policing was a step backwards, and felt the $100,000 would go a long way in facilitating a 12-15 month process for a community-based strategic plan after the Council adopted community policy as the policy for Columbia. He believed this would dramatically reduce distrust, and did not feel the Police Department could do this work internally.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that the $100,000 for community policing was an excellent idea, and suggested it be increased by 25 percent per year to help pay for future officers or other needs.
25

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
The vote on B272-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B254-15 B256-15 B257-15 B258-15 B259-15
B260-15
B262-15
B263-15 B264-15 B265-15
B266-15 B267-15 B268-15

Rezoning property located on the north side of St. Charles Road and west of Elderbrook Drive (4515 St. Charles Road) from District A-1 to District R1.
Approving the Final Plat of Wyndham Ridge, Plat No. 3-A, a Replat of Lot D2 Wyndham Ridge Plat No. 3, located on the north side of Steinbrooke Terrace and east of Scott Boulevard.
Approving the Final Plat of Wyndham Ridge, Plat No. 3-B, a Replat of Lot D3 Wyndham Ridge Plat No. 3, located on the north side of Steinbrooke Terrace and east of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Approving the Final Plat of Rock Bridge Christian Church Plat 3, a minor Replat of Lot 201 Rock Bridge Christian Church Plat 2 located on the north side of Green Meadows Road and east of Bethel Street.
Authorizing construction of street and sewer improvements along a portion of Discovery Drive, from the intersection of Discovery Drive and Discovery Parkway southeastward; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of sanitary sewer improvements along the MKT Trail and Providence Road from Stadium Boulevard to Elm Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 1.
Authorizing an agreement for conveyance of easements with Woodrail Home Owners Association No. 4 as it relates to the Forum Boulevard pedestrian bridge (GetAbout) project; vacating easements for sidewalk and drainage and temporary construction purposes.
Appropriating transit division funds to cover overages in personnel and fleet maintenance accounts.
Declaring the results of the election held in the City of Columbia, Missouri on August 4, 2015; reimposing a sales tax of one-fourth of one percent for funding capital improvements.
Authorizing amendments to PCS antenna agreements and memorandums of lease with T-Mobile Central LLC relating to the lease of property and space on the Shepard Water Tower (1160 Cinnamon Hill Lane) and the Walnut Street Water Tower (15 E. Walnut Street).
Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Families America program.
Authorizing a memorandum of understanding with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the issuance of birth and death certificates and the associated technology resources.
Accepting a Walmart Community Grant to be used by the Fire Department for the purchase of physical training equipment for the Fire Training Academy; appropriating funds.
26

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting

B269-15

Appropriating funds to cover the costs of FY 2015 medical and prescription drug claims.

B270-15

Appropriating funds to the Firefighters' Retirement Fund and Police Retirement Fund.

B271-15

Appropriating FY 2014 General Fund savings to General Fund departments as part of the Incentive Based Budgeting Initiative.

R148-15

Setting a public hearing: construction and installation of concrete pads and bus shelters at various locations throughout the city.

R149-15

Setting a public hearing: construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive.

R150-15

Transferring funds for repairs to the art exhibit at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial at Battle Garden.

R151-15

Transferring funds for building security upgrades to the Columbia Police Department building.

R152-15

Authorizing submission of a FY 2016 Historic Preservation Fund Grants Survey/National Register Projects Application to the Missouri Department of Natural Resources to fund the North Central Columbia Historic Survey.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS None.
INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all
were given first reading.

B273-15 B274-15 B275-15 B276-15
B277-15 B278-15

Amending Chapter 29 of the City Code as it relates to pet stores, grooming or small animal care establishments.
Approving the C-P Plan for First Midwest Bank ­ Red Oak South located on the southeast corner of Grindstone Parkway and Norfleet Drive.
Approving a major revision to the C-P Development Plan for Lot 2 ­ Katy Place Heights located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Forum Katy Parkway (1410 Forum Katy Parkway).
Authorizing the release of access easements on Lot 303 within Berlekamp Subdivision Plat 3 located on the west side of Paris Road and north of U.S. Highway 63; authorizing execution of an easement release conveyance.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to prohibit parking along both sides of Allen Street, from Bryant Street to Trinity Place.
Authorizing conveyance of street and utility easements to The County of Boone, and a water line easement to Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri, necessary for the relocation of
27

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at the Columbia Regional Airport.

B279-15

Accepting conveyances for sewer, utility and temporary construction purposes.

B280-15

Authorizing the construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive; determining that the work shall be done by City employees.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP94-15 Requiring Property Owners to Identify Illegal Connections to the Sanitary Sewer System.

Mayor McDavid understood the only way to obtain compliance would be to require this at a point of sale. Mr. Glascock stated that would be the easiest way, but there were likely other options. Mayor McDavid asked if this would require inspection by the City. Mr. Glascock replied staff had contacted some professional service companies, and they had indicated the cost for them to provide the service would be $200-$500. He noted they would likely want the lateral inspected at the same time to ensure it was in good repair as well, and that would cost more. They believed the lateral would likely be in worse shape than anything connected to it, and would likely leak the worst. Mayor McDavid asked who would be responsible for fixing the lateral. Mr. Glascock replied the property owner. Mayor McDavid commented that this would be an increased burden on central city citizens, who were already stressed financially. Mr. Glascock noted they were finding that about nine percent of homes had illicit connections, and his goal was to get the City's system in good repair before asking homeowners to resolve their issues. He explained that was the reason they had not pursued this previously, but agreed it would need to be pursued in the future.
Ms. Nauser stated she had asked staff to provide a report on this issue because they had a backlog in trying to fix the inflow and infiltration problems throughout the City, and ratepayers were paying for the work. She thought it would be helpful to identify the issues more quickly so they could be addressed more quickly. She understood they could not make a decision on this particular issue at this time.
Mr. Matthes noted the City could begin to address the situation with rental properties. Ms. Nauser thought they should move forward with whatever they could to address the situation sooner than later as that would be more cost-effective for everyone in the long run.
Mr. Skala asked if they had exhausted the capacity to incentivize actions to correct illegal connections. Mr. Glascock replied the City had a program to help with some of the costs for disconnecting downspouts or sump pumps, but the problems needed to be found and the property owners had to want to correct the problem.
Mr. Trapp asked if the rental housing inspectors would be able to do a visual inspection as part of their normal inspection process, and understood this would not involve inspecting the laterals. Mr. Glascock replied the inspectors would only look at downspouts and sump pumps. Mr. Trapp stated he thought that was reasonable.

REP95-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
28

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, commented that the increase in the sewer connection fees would not pay for all of the new infrastructure required, but it would be fairer than the current system. It was the first step in convincing other people that they would have to pay their fair share. He explained he was tired of the Council and City staff saying they could not plan or forecast, and noted there were people all over the country that could reasonably project costs for a variety of infrastructure. He suggested those people be contacted so they could determine a fair and proportionate amount for new development to pay.
Mr. Clark suggested the City require sidewalks similar to how they require streets as a long term policy, and believed they could then think their way back to how they would deal with the older sidewalks. He reiterated the sidewalks needed to be a part of the right-of-way and dedicated to the City similar to streets.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, understood there had been a major accident on Scott Boulevard this morning, and asked if Scott Boulevard was owned by the City. Mr. Matthes replied it was owned by the City. Mr. Elkin suggested speed monitors be placed along Scott Boulevard to address speeding issues. He also suggested the use of rumble strips horizontally to slow down traffic.
John Conway, 4902 Thornbrook Ridge, understood some wanted to include the water system in the review by the Mayor's Task Force on Infrastructure, and noted there were many existing studies which were guiding documents for the future. He recommended the Council read those studies he had mentioned earlier tonight as they would provide some insight on the work needed in the future, and pointed out an integrated resource plan for water had already been commissioned as the Water and Light Advisory Board had been involved with developing the scope of services. He explained the Water and Light Advisory Board was a citizen board whose members were appointed by the Council, and he believed they were fulfilling the obligations of the Board.
Mr. Skala explained he had recently returned from a National League of Cities (NLC) summit in Orlando, Florida, whose theme was Leading Through Times, and issues of social equity and economics were discussed. He commented that there was a new group called Race, Equity and Leadership, who planned to speak at the NLC Conference in Nashville, Tennessee in November. He listed some of the speakers at the summit, and noted they had discussed the unique aspects of Columbia and the unique aspects of Orlando. He stated he would present the information to the Council in the future, and had planned to pursue connections with the Race, Equity and Leadership group.
Mr. Skala commented that he was asked by a couple constituents to determine if there might be consensus on the Council to consider holding closed sessions at times when other open sessions were not being held. It was inconvenient for the public when invited to an open session without proper time being allocated due to closed meeting issues. He asked for some resolution to the problem.
29

City Council Minutes ­ 09/21/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters stated she had the same thought, especially when they invited people to present information. She believed the open session should be held first, and the closed session should be held at the end of the meeting. She understood they could do another night, but noted she was not fond of that idea.
Mr. Ruffin explained he had starting participating on the Columbia Alliance to Combat Homelessness (CATCH) Board, which was an outgrowth of the Room at the Inn program, prior to being elected. The goal of CATCH was to build a comprehensive service center for the homeless located in the First Ward. He noted they were sponsoring a meeting at 6:30 p.m. on October 6 at Jefferson Middle School for the surrounding neighborhoods and public to share their thoughts about this vision.
Ms. Nauser asked that more detail than account numbers be provided in the future for bills such as B271-15, which appropriated money from the budget surplus. She suggested the department name and what specifically the money would go toward to be a part of the ordinance or report.
Ms. Nauser noted a speaker earlier in the evening referred to a Race Relations Task Force report and asked for a copy of the document as she did not believe she had ever seen it. Ms. Amin replied she would provide them a copy.
Ms. Nauser commented that although violent crimes had gone down over the 20122014 time frame, there had been a spike in violent crime in the last six months, and mainly due to assaults. She asked the Police Department to include the reason for that increase in the report they planned to provide to Council.
Mayor McDavid explained he reviewed the data as well, and from January to August, violent crime was at 330 this year compared to 285 last year. This was an increase from where it was the last few years, but it was not in a range that was out of line. He noted the statistics were also showing a reduction of 50 percent in property crimes, so he was unsure if the data could be trusted. He thought there was some credence to assaults being up.
Ms. Nauser reiterated her request for the Police Department to share any theories they had for the increase in assaults, and the types of assaults that had increased.
Mr. Thomas asked staff to prepare a report as to whether other cities helped to encourage affordable housing by providing discounts, subsidies, or exemptions on various connection fees and impact fees, or if they had other similar strategies that could be controlled to specifically target and encourage affordable housing. He also wanted the thoughts of staff with regard to similar strategies being implemented in Columbia.
The meeting adjourned at 12:01 a.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
30

