City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI OCTOBER 5, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, October 5, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS and MCDAVID were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
Mayor McDavid explained the minutes of the regular meeting of September 21, 2015 were not yet complete.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Ms. Peters asked that R156-15 and R162-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business.
Mr. Thomas asked that R159-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business. Ms. Nauser asked that R157-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business. Upon her request, Mr. Skala made a motion to allow Ms. Nauser to abstain from voting on R162-15 due to a conflict of interest. Ms. Nauser noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that her family business was involved in alcohol sales. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote. Ms. Peters made a motion to remove R163-15 from the agenda per the request of staff. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. The agenda, including the consent agenda with R156-15, R157-15, R159-15, and R162-15 being moved to new business, and R163-15 being removed from the agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Mr. Thomas.
SPECIAL ITEMS
Swearing in of John Glascock as the Deputy City Manager of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Glascock to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Glascock as Deputy City Manager.
Swearing in of Tad Johnsen as the Director of Utilities of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Johnsen to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Johnsen as Director of Utilities.
1

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Swearing in of Dave Nichols as the Director of Public Works of the City of Columbia.
Mayor McDavid asked Mr. Nichols to join Mr. Matthes, City Manager, and Ms. Amin, City Clerk, to the podium.
The City Clerk administered the oath of office to Mr. Nichols as Director of Public Works.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
Mayor McDavid appointed Amy Wasowicz to the Mayor's Task Force on Pedestrian Safety, and explained she was replacing Syed Ejaz.
MAYOR'S TASK FORCE ON PEDESTRIAN SAFETY Amy Wasowicz, 1300 Rollins Street, #4160, Ward 6
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp - Discussion of diversity, inclusion, and human capacity.
Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, questioned how many worlds one could walk in besides one's own with grace, and noted she was black, spoke Spanish, and could walk in a few worlds beyond her own and likely fake it in four or five others because she was comfortable outside of her comfort zone. She believed bad outcomes were a result of people not being able to get out of their comfort zones, and provided achievement gap, mass incarceration, health disparities, etc. as outcome examples. She quoted former Supreme Court Justice Thurgood Marshall as saying "Obviously I too believe in a colorblind society but it has been and remains an aspiration. It is a goal to which our society has progressed, uncertainly, bearing as it does the enormous burdens of incalculable injuries inflicted by race, prejudice and other bigotries which the law once sanctioned and even encouraged. Not having attained our goal, we must face the simple fact there were groups in every community which were daily paying the cost of American in justice." She commented that it was important to not have a clutch response of "what about black on black crime" when talking about police and crime, and felt they needed to be able to move beyond those comments. She also felt they needed to think about how they engaged conversation. Her formula was collaboration plus inclusion plus capacity would equal diversity. They had to re-engineer what they thought of diversity. She explained they were willing to learn new technology regularly and had to treat diversity in the same manner. It was not static and always changed so they had to relentlessly be willing to keep learning. She stated collaboration was not a checklist, different strategies were needed for every situation, and the impact of the strategies needed to not do any harm. It required a lifelong approach, flexibility, and the willingness for people to look at their own personal toolbox to determine what was missing. Inclusion involved having all of the right people at the table, not operating in a silo, thinking outside of the box, a desire for all of the facts, etc. She commented that being able to walk into other worlds provided the opportunity to gain outside experiences. She stated intellectual and human capital provided the capacity to solve problems. There was not a single application, and it would require multiple approaches at the same time. She asked if that could be done as a community. She thought it was important for people to not feel they could use the N-
2

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
word or make any kind of comment about anyone, and for people to have the skills to say they would not accept those remarks any more. She quoted Thomas C. Holt of saying "Like many others who had gone before you, you must struggle against injustice with all your might. You must refuse to be racialized or to racialize others, but at the same time you must live as if the world was otherwise. You must reach out and claim it as your own. I know that is a lot to ask. It will certainly require a difficult heroism and subtle resistance as well as exposure to the risk of being misunderstood by your peers and elders, but perhaps, just perhaps, when enough people do as you do, racism will indeed have no future." She commented that the challenge was how many worlds one could walk in and could they lead others to do the same with grace.
Julie Ladehoff - Community policing and issues of racial justice in Columbia.
Ms. Ladehoff, 1025 Lakeside Drive, stated she was representing Race Matters and commented that she had chosen the creation of a curriculum for a sixteen week college course on the topic of white privilege as it related to modern racism for her capstone project for her degree from the University of Missouri. During her work on the course, she read scholar after scholar, who asserted that most European-American whites were unaware of their privileged status in a society where white supremacy and institutionalized racism were the norm. In numerous disciplines, including social work, psychology, education, political science, and business, the message proclaiming the need for whites to examine their own racial privilege was being affirmed. The reason modern racism was invisible to most whites was because it resided mostly in systems instead of acts of personal prejudice. This modern form of racism, which followed the heels of Jim Crow, was often defined or called colorblind racism as most whites felt they were non-racist while benefitting from privileges or lacking disadvantages on a daily basis and in significant areas of their lives, simply based on skin color. She agreed it was difficult to separate out class dynamics from race dynamics, but noted many scholars agreed race alone, separate from the element of social class, afforded whites privileges in the areas of housing, education, healthcare, employment, etc. One element of society where modern racism played out with devastating consequences for people of color was the criminal justice system. On August 20, 2015, the Columbia Police Department had participated in a course called Procedural Justice for Law Enforcement Agencies ­ Organizational Change through the Integration of Procedural Justice Core Principles in Decision-Making and Policies created under the auspicious of the Department of Justice. The stated purpose of the course was to assist in the organizational transformation of a response-oriented police service to one based on policies that supported community policing. This transformation to a community policing model rather than a response-oriented model was one of the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She commented that trust, transparency, and community involvement were emphasized in the report as values to espouse in reducing violence. She urged the Police Department to make the transition from a service focused on responding to calls to a service that was proactive and focused on crime prevention. She noted Race Matters had great confidence in the ability of the Police Department to make the change. In order to fulfill the potential of the Police Department's new commitment, as stated in the citizens handbook, on problem-
3

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
oriented policing and community policing, Race Matters was asking the Council to support this new level of engagement in ways detailed by the current policy literature on community policy by hosting a forum for the Police Department to outline this new model of policing, inviting the Police Department to describe the problem-oriented policing projects they had developed, and asking the Police Department to inform those living in the highest crime areas to work with them in creating solutions that would address crime in their neighborhoods. As a lifelong resident of Columbia, she was grateful for the abundant strengths of the community and asked community leaders to take bold actions in leading Columbia toward greater justice for all of its citizens.
Mary Hussmann - Red light cameras.
Ms. Hussmann, 210 Ridgeway Avenue, commented that Gatso, the company the City entered into a five-year deal with in 2009, had talked communities into installing red light cameras by claiming they would improve safety. She thought most Missourians felt red light cameras were primarily used to generate revenue instead of improving safety. For each $120 ticket, Columbia received $76 and Gatso received $44. Initially, the cameras took pictures of the front plate and the driver, and a ticket was mailed to the alleged if police officers were able to match the face to the owner's driver's license. She believed comparing photos for fines was a poor use of the professional experience and time of officers, and noted an officer out on the street ticketing a driver for running a red light would not have this identification problem. In August 2013, staff reported officers were not able to consistently make matches, and thus, the City was losing about $200,000. At the urging of staff, the Council agreed to only ticket the title owner. She pointed out the report provided to Council did not focus on safety improvements. It was all about money. She noted the Missouri Supreme Court declared this method to be unconstitutional and mandated that points be applied against the violator's driver's license. St. Louis, Kansas City, and other Missouri communities were refunding money to car owners illegally ticketed by title only. She wondered how much money Columbia illegally generated and whether the City would refund those illegally charged. She commented that people could now buy a product that could be sprayed on a license plate to block it from a radar or enforcement camera. She suggested Columbia move away from this punitive system and recommended free drivers education classes instead. She also suggested the Council wait to proceed with red light cameras again until the next Missouri legislative session ended as bills would again be filed to restrict red light cameras as she was concerned about the repercussions of another five-year Gatso contract if a restriction was passed by the legislators. She asked the Council to vote against red light cameras.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive.
B280-15 Authorizing the construction of water mains along portions of Molly Lane, Lakeland Drive, Linda Lane and Sarah Ann Drive; determining that the work shall be done by City employees.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Item A was read by the Clerk, and B280-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if these mains had been installed prior to annexation into the City. Mr. Johnsen replied he did not believe this area had been annexed into the City. He thought this area was just outside the City limits. He explained payment was a little higher when the utility acquired water district pipes just outside of the City, and believed these had a 15 percent higher water rate. Mayor McDavid understood historically there had been an issue of lower standards outside of the City limits and asked if that had been rectified. He wondered if infrastructure construction outside of the City limits conformed to what was required by the City of Columbia. He did not believe they wanted to take over substandard infrastructure as citizens of Columbia would then have to pay to upgrade it. Mr. Johnsen explained there were differences between rural water districts and metropolitan water utilities, and the primary difference involved fire protection, which was being resolved in this situation. He pointed out they were not transferring any potable water. It was essentially a fire protection project. He noted that as the old water lines wore out, these properties would be transferred to the new lines, but that it was not currently part of this project. Ms. Peters understood the City did not have to upgrade these new lines. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct in terms of the potable water supply, but noted the upgrade was needed for fire protection. He explained eight- and six-inch lines were needed for fire protection. Ms. Peters understood that when the potable water lines became old, the City could just transfer the water utilizing these new lines. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct. He explained the ones the City was installing now were by the street and the existing lines were in the back yards of properties, so they would not have to dig up backyard to replace those. Mr. Thomas understood these customers paid 15 percent higher rates. Mr. Johnsen stated this was typical for customers that were outside of City limits and previously water district customers. The agreement authorized a shade more than 15 percent in this situation. Mr. Thomas asked if this would continue forever. Mr. Johnsen replied he thought it would continue until the property was annexed into the City. Mr. Skala noted this area was contiguous to the City limits and was in the area slated to be annexed due to Battle High School. He thought this project was essential in terms of firefighting capacity and public safety. Mr. Johnsen explained the City's service territory went toward Lake of the Woods Golf Course and north. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Thomas believed this was similar to new developments in many ways, whereby the City would want to apply a connection fee. He understood the City was investing $300,000 to bring water service up to City standards, but the fact they were paying a higher rate mitigated this to some extent. He noted this was an expense the City would not have if they had not added these customers to the municipal water service. Mr. Skala commented that although he agreed with that concept in terms of new capacity, this was an established area. In addition, the City did not have connection fees in
5

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
place for this enhanced safety factor. He agreed with Mr. Thomas philosophically, but did not feel they could lay that type of burden on the people in this area.
B280-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
OLD BUSINESS
B245-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to revise the speed limit on portions of Providence Road and State Route K.
The bill was given third reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood the speed limit was 45 mph east of Coneflower Avenue and 55 mph west of Coneflower Avenue to Scott Boulevard. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas understood the proposal was to reduce the speed limit to 45 mph from Coneflower Avenue west to Scott Boulevard, and asked for the speed limit east from Coneflower Avenue to Providence Road. Mr. Nichols replied that speed limit was 55 mph. Mr. Thomas asked why the entire section was not being reduced as there was more residential development in that section. Mr. Stone replied the MoDOT study indicated speeds were higher in that section and was mainly concerned about the section from Coneflower Avenue to Providence Road due to the number of curves and collisions. Mr. Thomas asked how he would characterize the impact of changing the speed limit on drivers in terms of the speeds driven. Mr. Stone replied the operating speeds of traffic right now were close to the speed limit suggestion of MoDOT. Mr. Thomas commented that the diagram indicated the speed limit was already 45 mph from Coneflower Avenue to the east. Mr. Stone stated he thought that was the proposed speed. Mr. Thomas thought the change would be west of Coneflower Avenue. Ms. Nauser understood the change was from Scott Boulevard to Coneflower Avenue. Mr. Stone stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas understood the speed limit there was 45 mph and achieving 47 and 46 mph, and they would change the section west to Scott Boulevard from 55 mph to 45 mph in hopes to bring down the 50 and 52 mph to closer to 45 mph. Mr. Skala thought they needed to be consistent, and if they had a lower speed limit on the section to the east, this speed limit should be consistent with the speed limit on the west. He believed that would optimize the result they were trying to achieve. Mr. Thomas asked if the characteristic of the road had changed. Ms. Nauser replied there was more development along Route K. Mr. Skala felt that made the argument to reduce the speed limit even more compelling. Ms. Nauser stated it would be more consistent with City ordinances on speeds. Mr. Stone explained MoDOT set the speed limit and the City's ordinances reflected that speed limit. Ms. Nauser stated she was concerned by the speed limit remaining at 55 mph before Scott Boulevard. She questioned whether people would reduce their speeds, and asked who had requested this change. Mr. Stone replied MoDOT had reviewed it as part of their periodic reviews of roadways.
6

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala asked if it worth asking MoDOT to consider the piece that connected with Scott Boulevard so it was entirely consistent. Mr. Stone replied they could ask MoDOT. Ms. Nauser stated she would support talking to MoDOT so the entire section from McBaine on through was reduced due to some of the site lines at the intersection with Route KK. Mr. Stone noted staff would contact the MoDOT engineer regarding their request.
The vote on B245-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B273-15 B274-15 B275-15 B276-15
B277-15 B278-15
B279-15 R153-15
R154-15
R155-15 R158-15 R160-15

Amending Chapter 29 of the City Code as it relates to pet stores, grooming or small animal care establishments.
Approving the C-P Plan for First Midwest Bank ­ Red Oak South located on the southeast corner of Grindstone Parkway and Norfleet Drive.
Approving a major revision to the C-P Development Plan for Lot 2 ­ Katy Place Heights located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Forum Katy Parkway (1410 Forum Katy Parkway).
Authorizing the release of access easements on Lot 303 within Berlekamp Subdivision Plat 3 located on the west side of Paris Road and north of U.S. Highway 63; authorizing execution of an easement release conveyance.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to prohibit parking along both sides of Allen Street, from Bryant Street to Trinity Place.
Authorizing conveyance of street and utility easements to The County of Boone, and a water line easement to Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri, necessary for the relocation of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at the Columbia Regional Airport.
Accepting conveyances for sewer, utility and temporary construction purposes.
Setting a public hearing: construction of sanitary sewer improvements along Providence Road from 125 feet south of Stewart Road to Turner Avenue and along Turner Avenue to Fourth Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2.
Setting a public hearing: construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle.
Authorizing various Adopt a Spot agreements.
Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with Engineering Surveys and Services for the Ninth and Elm Pedestrian Scramble Project.
Authorizing Supplemental Agreements No. 1 and 2 to the professional engineering services agreement with CDG Engineers, Inc. for design
7

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
services for construction of pedway, trail and shoulder improvements along Clark Lane between Paris Road and the east side of the Highway 63 Connector, and south along Hinkson Creek between Clark Lane and the south side of I-70.

R161-15

Approving amendments to Community Housing Development Organization (CHDO) agreements with Central Missouri Community Action, Columbia Missouri Community Housing Development Organization and Show-Me Central Habitat for Humanity.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS
R156-15 Authorizing agreements with various cultural organizations; authorizing agreements of up to $750 per agreement for arts programming or services for cultural organizations.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Musgrove provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this had come up in August. Mr. Musgrove replied yes. He explained the Chair of the Commission on Cultural Affairs had announced the Commission had made recommendations for funding in August, but had to wait until the beginning of the fiscal year to put those contracts into place. This was the authorization to enter into those contracts. Ms. Peters understood it had been a report. Mr. Musgrove stated it had essentially been a comment from the Chair thanking the Council for its support for the upcoming contracts. Mr. Skala asked how the Commission had achieved its goal of $100,000 to the dollar. Mr. Musgrove replied the amount recommended for funding was not, in most cases, the amount requested by the organization. He noted organizations could apply for up to $10,000, and the Commission reviewed and scored the applications. They then used a formula the Missouri Arts Council had used for years to reach the dollar amount the City was able to fund. The vote on R156-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

R157-15 Authorizing a software service agreement with ReCollect Systems Inc. relating to solid waste and recycling activities for City utility customers.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Glascock provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser understood this company was out of Canada and asked how they had chosen ReCollect Systems. Mr. Glascock replied he thought they probably tried to find the cheapest model that would provide the type of service they wanted. He explained the City's Information Technologies Department was unable to provide this service for another three years due to other items they were currently working on.

8

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser asked for the goals with the purchase of this service. Mr. Glascock replied residents had asked for more information on diversion rates and how they could be better informed when routes changed due to weather or holidays. The City had similar software for transit, and hoped this would assist with solid waste.
Mr. Skala asked if this would also be accessible through the website for those that did not have smartphones. Mr. Glascock replied yes.
Mr. Matthes explained solid waste calls were tied with transit as the number one type of call to the contact center. The thought was that the number of calls might be reduced with a smartphone app. Mr. Glascock noted it also enhanced their educational component as City staff educated people on recycling all of the time.
The vote on R157-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R159-15 Authorizing an agreement for professional engineering services with Bartlett & West, Inc. for preliminary and final design of the Forum Boulevard and Green Meadows Road intersection roundabout project.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas asked for the primary purpose of this project. Mr. Nichols replied it was to relieve congestion at the intersection. Mr. Thomas understood a typical roundabout processed traffic about 30 percent better than a 4-way stop. Mr. Nichols thought that was about right. Mr. Thomas understood pedestrian safety was improved at a roundabout compared to a 4-way stop. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct, and explained it was because the offsets were further away from the intersection. Mr. Thomas asked if Bartlett and West had designed the roundabout at Fairview Road and Rollins Road or any other roundabout in Columbia. Mr. Nichols replied no, and explained they had designed the Forum Boulevard Pedestrian Bridge. Mr. Thomas understood that had not been built yet. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct, and explained the last easement had just recently been acquired. The City would bid this out this winter. Mr. Thomas asked for references for roundabouts Bartlett and West had designed. Mr. Nichols replied he would provide that information. Mr. Skala commented that Mr. Thomas had a good point regarding the design because the public sometimes worried about the fact there were different designs. He thought it would be interesting to know the extent to which this was consistent with the existing roundabouts. Mr. Nichols explained the City had provided Bartlett and West examples already in place. Mr. Skala understood this had been a placeholder in the CIP Plan. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser asked if this would be similar to the Fairview Road roundabout. Mr. Nichols replied no. Ms. Peters asked why the City was not using the same company it had used before for roundabouts. Mr. Nichols replied Bartlett and West was a qualified engineering firm that had produced plans and specifications on time for every project they had done for the City, and
9

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
timing was critical here because this project needed to be done before starting the projects at Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard so it would help relieve congestion.
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, understood there had been talk about a roundabout in lieu of building a bridge and asked if that had been discounted or if it was still a possibility. Mr. Thomas replied he understood funding for the Forum Boulevard expansion had stayed the same in the ballot question and the ballot had passed. As a result, the project was on the CIP Plan as a funded project. He commented that he planned to continue to explore the possibility of reducing the scope of the project with roundabouts, and this was one roundabout that could help. Mr. Shanker asked if this bill included the bridge. Mr. Thomas replied no.
Steve Wendling, 555 E. Green Meadows Road, Suite 9, stated he was an advocate of the roundabout, but wanted to make sure that intersection remained open to traffic. Mr. Nichols thought they would have to build this in phases so traffic could still utilize the intersection.
Mr. Thomas stated he thought this was an excellent location for a roundabout as it would improve the flow of traffic and would bring traffic to a more appropriate speed for the area. He understood it was important for roundabouts to have high structure, such as landscaping or public art, in the middle of the so it was visible from a distance. He noted a complaint he had heard regarding the Fairview Road roundabout was that drivers did not see it coming.
Mr. Skala commented that the size of the Fairview Road roundabout was so small that it was almost like a speed bump.
Mayor McDavid suggested skeptics of roundabouts conduct a YouTube search of MythBusters roundabouts.
Mr. Ruffin asked if there was a possibility of removing the roundabout at Fairview Road due to the number of complaints. Mr. Nichols replied there had not been many reported accidents and he believed the number of complaints were fewer than when it was initially installed as people had become acclimated to it. He noted it also served the function needed for that location. He explained the reason they had not installed a typical roundabout there was because they would have had to move major water lines and purchase some homes. The roundabout also helped pedestrian flow to the school in the area. He noted they currently did not have plans to remove it.
The vote on R159-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R162-15 Consenting to the issuance of a state license for the sale of intoxicating liquor at the Clean Cut Barbershop LLC located at 510 East Green Meadows Road, Suite 105.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Blattel provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if the City had written permission from the property owners or if they had just notified them. Mr. Blattel replied they had just notified the property owners.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala asked if there were any other barber shops in Columbia that had liquor licenses. Ms. Finley replied there was one.
Ms. Peters asked if the City normally provided liquor licenses to anyone within 100 feet of a church or daycare. She wondered if this was common or unusual. Ms. Finley replied it was somewhat unusual. She explained there had been a few requests for liquor establishments within 100 feet of a church or daycare within the past 7-8 years, and those had all been brought to Council for consideration, and had all been approved.
Mr. Trapp asked if the Academy for Early Childhood Learning had been notified. Ms. Finley replied yes, and explained the communication indicated it would be discussed at tonight's meeting. She understood the owner of the Academy had received the communication due the return receipt being received.
Ms. Peters understood one person that had a child at the Academy had indicated it was a bad idea, but had also stated that his child would only be there for six more months so he did not plan to speak against it.
Mr. Trapp commented that he planned to ask for this to be tabled after public comment was taken because he wanted a better feel for it.
Steve Wendling, 555 E. Green Meadows Road, Suite 9, explained he was the landlord of the building for Clean Cut Barbershop and the owner of the Academy for Early Childhood Learning. He understood they were asking for an ancillary addition to the business of cutting hair. It was not be a beer joint or a liquor establishment as he would not allow that as the landlord. He noted he supported the request and believed it was 90 feet from the pre-school building to the back door of the barbershop.
Ms. Peters asked for the reason for serving beer while getting a haircut. Mr. Wendling replied he assumed it was for marketing purposes.
DJ Bishop explained she and Stephanie Murry had managed male hair salons in the past and were now opening this small business. She noted it would be less than five percent alcohol, which would equate to 6.3 percent by volume. It would only be beer and wine, and there would be a two drink maximum. Customers would likely drink while they were waiting for a haircut.
Richard Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, understood these people would not have had to ask Council for permission if they had been ten feet further from the pre-school, and suggested the Council approve their request.
Mr. Wendling pointed out the pre-school currently had 106 families and approximately 80 students attended the dance academy, and the objection Ms. Peters had mentioned was the only objection he had heard.
Mr. Trapp commented that in the absence of anyone opposing this he would support it. Mr. Skala stated he was curious to know more about the other similar establishment and asked staff to provide that information. Mr. Thomas stated he was supportive of this, and noted it sounded like a place in Nashville, Tennessee, which was a combined laundry mat and bar. The vote on R162-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, PETERS, MCDAVID. VOTING NO: NO ONE. ABSTAIN: NAUSER. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
11

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING
The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

B281-15 B282-15 B283-15 B284-15 B285-15 B286-15 B287-15
B288-15 B289-15 B290-15 B291-15
B292-15 B293-15
B294-15

Approving a major amendment to the Boone Hospital South Campus C-P Plan located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Nifong Boulevard.
Rezoning property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road from District C-1 to District O-P; approving the statement of intent.
Approving the O-P Plan of River Region Credit Union ­ West Broadway for property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road.
Appropriating funds for repairs to the art exhibit at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial at Battle Garden.
Authorizing construction of sanitary sewers in Sewer District No. 170 (Bethel Church Road/Poplar Hill Drive); calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 3.
Authorizing a waterline replacement contract with Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri relating to the relocation of a portion of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at Columbia Regional Airport.
Authorizing grant agreements with the Mid-Missouri Solid Waste Management District for the purchase of front-loading recycling containers and apartment recycling drop off bins; appropriating funds.
Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to industrial pretreatment requirements for the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to relocate a taxi stand on Tenth Street.
Accepting donated funds and twenty-five (25) LED exterior wall sconces from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Water and Light Department for street light improvements in the downtown area; appropriating funds.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing an agreement with The Curators of the University of Missouri, on behalf of its Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, relating to emergency veterinary services for injured animals retrieved by animal control officers.
Accepting a donation from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Office of Sustainability for the Steps to Sustainability recognition program; appropriating funds.

12

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting

REP96-15 Report from Bicycle/Pedestrian Commission on Complete Streets/Intersections.

Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if this request required legislation or consensus. Mr. Thomas replied he would argue it required legislation. The City had a complete streets policy in terms of providing equitable access for automobile drivers, pedestrians, cyclists, the elderly, children, people with disabilities, etc., so everyone could navigate the community safely and effectively. He recalled the creation of complete intersection concepts was supposed to be the next step so intersections did not remain barriers. He thought the Bicycle/Pedestrian Commission was asking Council to complete the work the City did in 2004 by adding intersections to the complete streets policy and street design standards. Mr. Thomas asked if this could be written into the Code of Ordinances with the existing street design standards. Mr. Nichols replied staff wanted the opportunity to review this report and provide Council another report on this issue with their thoughts. He was concerned about mandating a policy without some flexibility. Mr. Thomas stated he was agreeable, and asked that staff provide that report. Mr. Thomas commented that a couple members of the Mayor's Task Force on Pedestrian Safety had timed how long it took to get from the northeast to the northwest corner of the Bernadette Drive and Stadium Boulevard intersection, and it had taken 5.5-9.5 minutes to traverse the three legs. He believed intersections that made it difficult for pedestrians to traverse would encourage people to take risks and cross where there was no protection. He asked staff to take that into consideration when reviewing this issue. Mr. Skala commented that he recalled they had avoided the intersections when developing the street design standards because they did not have the in-house expertise to review it at the time. He stated he did not feel they ever really had a complete streets design. Mr. Teddy explained CATSO now had a complete streets policy, and the City was part of CATSO. In addition, he would consider the existing street design standards as a complete streets code as new development of new intersections would involve complete streets and complete intersections. He thought this correspondence was targeting the retrofitting of existing intersections. Mr. Nichols stated that was correct. He explained staff wanted to provide a report because it might not always be in the best interest for all legs of an intersection to allow for a crosswalk. Mr. Thomas stated he did not believe the current street design standards required complete streets and complete intersections because MoDOT could allow for only two crosswalks. Mr. Teddy explained his point was that a new subdivision on undeveloped land would include complete intersections. There were only tradeoffs with high capacity roads. Mr. Thomas commented that he believed these commissions did not feel they should reduce the level of service for pedestrians even with high capacity upgrades, such as the intersection of Bernadette Drive and Stadium Boulevard. He asked Mr. Nichols to include in his report an inventory all of the intersections in Columbia that did not have crossing access across all legs, and to explain why staff might feel it was necessary in those situations or if they felt it was not necessary.
13

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp noted there was only one marked crossing at the intersection at Range Line Street and Vandiver Drive. Mr. Matthes stated staff would include that intersection in the list to report back to Council.
REP97-15 Overview of Columbia Parking Ticket System and Enforcement.
Mayor McDavid explained he had asked for this report because he had not been comfortable with the follow up of the payments of tickets and felt this report validated his concerns. He recalled the City publishing a list of people with outstanding parking tickets about 5-6 years ago, and one person had about 100 tickets. He wanted to ensure the City was following up on citations because it was easy to ignore, and he did not feel they had good system as it appeared as though a third of the tickets were not paid. He viewed a ticket as an account receivable, and thought the Finance Department needed to be involved. He also believed vehicles should be towed on the spot if they had at least three previous unpaid tickets. He pointed out they had to restrict parking, otherwise students would store their cars in those locations and it would be difficult for customers of commerce to park. He thought they needed to charge enough to ensure 15 percent of the spaces were open, and to penalize those that did not pay. He commented that this was important because that $900,000 allowed the City to break even in terms of municipal court and parking enforcement operations. He did not believe the City should leave $400,000 on the table as that would allow for more police officers. He asked City staff to manage this more aggressively.
Mr. Thomas stated he agreed with Mayor McDavid. He noted one of the messages he learned at the recent parking workshop was that if they did not do a good job of enforcement, the entire system would begin to fail and people would expect not to have to pay their parking tickets. A suggestion they were told that had been successful was to provide a warning with an explanation of the cost of the fine next time they did not pay, and to increase the fine substantially for any subsequent violation.
Mr. Thomas thought the City had a policy on towing and asked for clarification. Mr. Matthes replied he would characterize it as fairly lenient. The City provided 24-hour notice that the car would be towed after the fourth ticket. As a result, most people moved their vehicles. Mr. Thomas asked if they had to pay the four fines. Mr. Matthes replied it was still due to the City, but if the vehicle was moved, the City could not tow it. They had to find it again in order to tow it. Mr. Thomas understood it was then towed without another 24-hour notice. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct. He thought staff needed to analyze collection and enforcement and provide Council a recommended course of action to improve the situation.
Ms. Peters asked if the parking tickets were being paid more promptly now that the fine was $15 instead of $5. Mr. Matthes replied he thought they could provide that data to Council.
Mr. Skala understood a tow also involved police presence as parking utility personnel was not authorized to intervene with regard to a tow truck. Mr. Matthes replied he did not recall and would provide that information to Council as well. Mr. Skala thought if this was true, it would require a higher dedication to towing for the Police Department, which could create an extra burden.
14

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Trapp understood enforcement should be friendly and certain, and the facilitator of the parking workshop had recommendation a quick graduated increase so a person was not penalized for an inadvertent situation.
Ms. Peters understood the fine was $15 if paid within 15 days, and increased to $30 if not paid then. She noted that got her attention over the previous $5 fines.
Mr. Thomas commented that the recommendation at the parking workshop was for the next parking ticket to go from $30 to $50 or something of that nature, and for the rates to be publicized.
Mr. Trapp pointed out some people already felt parking tickets were outrageously high since they had increased from $5 to $15. He thought they needed to look at what the citizenry was used to as some felt it was high and others felt it was low.
Mr. Skala noted some people felt the City was making a profit on parking tickets. Mayor McDavid thought citizens needed to understand this $950,000 only covered the cost of municipal court and the parking enforcement. He pointed out he did not want to leave money on the table due to people violating rules and regulations. He also wanted to hire a couple police officers on those increased collections.
REP98-15 2015 Our Natural Legacy Implementation Actions Report.
Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if the Environment and Energy Commission (EEC) could weigh in on this topic. Mr. Griggs replied he would be glad to share this report and noted the meeting on January 19, 2016 would be a closed session. Mr. Skala stated that type of detail did not need to be provided to the EEC. He suggested providing them anything that would not necessarily be closed.
REP99-15 Vision Commission Media Mentions Report.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP100-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, commented that residents were getting conflicting reports on the cause of the water on William Street, and hoped the City would address the issue by this summer. He thought the City needed to dig it up to determine the source of the water.
John Conway, 4902 Thornbrook Ridge, stated he was the Chair of the Water and Light Advisory Board, and that depreciation was documented in budget for the water and electric utilities. It was about $2.7 million in the water utility and $14.7 million in the electric utility, and those funds had been expensed and would flow to the bottom line since depreciation was not paid to anyone else, and the money would lose its identity from depreciation to cash reserves.
15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Mr. Matthes understood there had been questions as to why the citizen handbook was mailed to every residential address in the community. He noted the cost had been $63,000 for the entire project, which was about $1 per household. He agreed it would have been cheaper to just place the handbook on the web for people to view, and for a few copies to be available for people to pick up if they wanted it, but he did not feel it communicated as well. He explained the people that had an interest in the City and would search for the link to read the handbook were the same people that subscribed to the newspaper and cable television. The City only reached one percent of the community via the website, and a potential of 20 percent with the other venues. He noted the only method by which they could reach every household was by mail, which was why they had made that decision. He understood some people were critical by how good the handbook looked, and explained they had showcased art within the community in hopes people would read it and leave it on their coffee tables.
Mr. Skala stated he appreciated this outreach because there were many people that did not avail themselves of information on the internet. He asked if this would be an annual commitment. Mr. Matthes replied yes. He explained it included a condensed version of the "State of the City" along with useful information with regard to city services, etc. In future years, they also wanted to report on progress of the strategic plan.
Mr. Trapp asked why it had been so cheap. Mr. Matthes replied the University of Missouri, who already had the capacity, had printed the handbook for the City, and the way it was delivered had been helpful as well. The City paid the bulk rate so it was provided to everyone on the mail route, and the post office did not have to sort it, etc. Mr. Trapp commented that this explained why it might have come to the residence and businesses of some people.
Ms. Peters understood the Council had received a report on October 20, 2014 with regard to backflow valves in relation to the sewer system, and asked if an update on that report could be received as to what was needed to move forward.
Ms. Peters asked about the process with regard to street closures in relation to the Red Bull request. Mr. Matthes replied an applicant had the right to appeal to Council if staff denied a street closure request. In the abundance of customer service, staff placed it on the agenda thinking Red Bull would appeal the decision, but they had not appealed it, and staff forgot to remove it from the agenda prior to its finalization.
Ms. Peters asked if there was a mechanism to notify neighborhoods that someone was asking for a street closure. Mr. Matthes replied the affected residents were supposed to be notified.
Ms. Peters asked if the neighborhood association was notified when a street closure was placed on a council meeting agenda. Mr. Matthes replied no. He explained there was not an obligation on the City or the applicant to notify a neighborhood association. Ms. Peters understood they should have been notified when the application was submitted. Mr. Matthes clarified only the adjoining property owners were required to be notified of the application.
Mr. Skala asked if this was subject to the 185 foot notification rule. Mr. Matthes replied no. In this situation only the adjoining property owners were notified. He explained the
16

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
ordinance was created for events downtown, but in this situation they had been looking at a residential street.
Mr. Thomas commented that the City had established a Youth Advisory Council about six months ago, and several members had expressed interest in attending the National League of Cities (NLC) Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year. He wanted to provide the opportunity to two students that had made compelling arguments to attend, and the cost was estimated to about $3,000. He understood there was also a need for a chaperone to attend, which would likely be a parent, and the City would not cover that cost.
Mr. Thomas made a motion to allocate $3,000 from the council reserve fund to support two Youth Advisory Commission student members to attend the NLC Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year.
Ms. Nauser stated she would not be able to attend the NLC Conference this year, and would be agreeable to $1,500 of her travel funds to be allocated for this trip.
Mr. Skala commented that he believed the information obtained at the NLC Conference would be very valuable, and thought it would be beneficial to youth to become involved in governmental issues.
Mayor McDavid stated he would not support this request as he did not believe this was a priority over other needs, such as police officers and firefighters.
Mr. Thomas revised his motion to be an allocation of $1,500 from the council reserve fund and an allocation of $1,500 from the money allocated to Ms. Nauser for travel for two student members of the Youth Advisory Commission to attend the NLC Conference in Nashville, Tennessee this year. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved by voice vote with only Mayor McDavid voting no.
Mr. Thomas stated he believed red light cameras were important in ensuring people obeyed the rules of the road to create a safer community. He did not believe the City had or would use them as revenue generators and felt that could be demonstrated. He, however, did not understand why they had to contract with a private company for the services. He asked why the City could not purchase and install the cameras in addition to providing staff for the review of photos and the issuance of tickets. Mr. Matthes replied he thought that could be done. It would, however, be more expensive. In the past, the company had provided the equipment and had conducted the initial screening so that what they sent the City was high quality video for final review and issuance of the ticket. He explained the City was preparing a presentation on red light cameras for Council consideration. Mr. Thomas commented that if the City were to implement red light cameras again, he would like how the money raised was utilized to be very transparently demonstrated.
Mr. Thomas explained he wanted to validate the comments of Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp and Ms. Ladehoff as he felt he was going through an epiphany on race relations and discrimination in Columbia and throughout the United States. He commented that he had started to educate himself on the history of slavery and the history of Africans in America. He admired those involved with Race Matters for pushing this issue. He understood the solutions would not be easy, but that one of the solutions was to look into the way the Police
17

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Department operated. He commented that he agreed it was far too easy for middle class white people to comfortably go through life without really trying to understand the issues others in the community experienced, and once those issues were investigated, those involved tended to not be compelled to be silent any longer.
Mr. Skala understood the NLC had a new group called Racial Equity in Leadership, which had been established last year. He noted he would participate as a member of this group in November, and hoped to bring information back to the Council that might be useful. He commented that he believed professional development was a way to break through the parochial barriers. It provided the opportunity to learn about solutions and failures on other communities in order to better Columbia. He noted $1,500 for travel would not fund a police officer. He stated he would love to have more police officers, and pointed out they had attempted to fund more officers through a ballot issue last November, which had failed. A police officer would cost $100,000 per year and $2 million in terms of a career. He thought providing money for youth to attend the NLC Conference was a valuable investment, which he would defend.
Mr. Skala asked staff to follow up on the water issue on William Street that Mr. Shanker had mentioned as he did not want it to persist. Mr. Matthes replied staff had located at least one break, but there could be more. The particular break was found between the water system and the house so it was a private water break. He understood the property owner knew about it and was committed to fixing it. Mr. Skala suggested a further follow up.
Mr. Skala commented that he had voted against red light cameras in the past, but noted he was willing to hear arguments that they really did provide public safety. He stated he would like data to be provided from the intersections at which the red light cameras had been located so they had the information to determine whether to extend the red light camera program or not.
Ms. Nauser asked if there was a way for a sensor to determine that someone was at a HAWK crossing on College Avenue without the person pushing the button to cross. She understood people would cross without pushing the button if there was not a lot of traffic, which was not safe. She was hoping the system would allow lights to flash if someone was just in the vicinity.
Ms. Nauser commented that a constituent had asked if bus routes could be changed so people were not dropped off and picked up on the shoulder of Providence Road, especially in the evening when it was difficult to see, and had suggested utilizing the outer road instead. She asked about the possibility.
Ms. Nauser stated she and Mr. Thomas had participated in a meeting regarding sidewalk repair and felt they needed to know the conditions of sidewalks throughout the community. She asked staff to create a sidewalk needs matrix so they knew exactly where repairs were needed and how badly they were needed. She thought they would have more credibility if they knew the exact needs.
18

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser noted there had previously been potholes on Parkade Boulevard, near the Moberly Area Community College, and those potholes had been repaired, but the road was still in disrepair as it was very bumpy. She asked staff to look into the issue as it needed to be resolved, especially if the work was done by a private contractor.
Ms. Nauser explained there was a proliferation of flag signs within right-of-ways notifying people of the desire to purchase cars, where flu shots could be received, etc., and people dancing and twirling signs outside of some business locations, and asked staff to look into the issue in terms of a potential amendment to the Code of Ordinances as these tended to be permanent signs instead of temporary signs.
Ms. Nauser commented that she had provided staff a $13,000 invoice from a constituent for stormwater repair for property at the corner of Brookdale Court and Elsdon Drive in the Highlands Subdivision. She understood stormwater had backed up on to Highlands Parkway, and the City had cut an inlet to relieve that problem. In doing so, that water was now on this property, and a bid to address the problem had come in at $13,000. She stated staff had indicated they would look into the issue, but understood the constituent had still not been contacted. She asked for a status report.
Ms. Nauser explained she had been contacted by a constituent that had indicated she had been trying to work with REDI, and wondered if they had a database that sent individuals that contacted them information about entrepreneurial opportunities, seminars, and workshops. The constituent had indicated she had learned about a seminar that would have benefitted her had she been notified. She thought this service might be useful in terms of informational outreach.
Ms. Nauser noted the outer roadway where Stoney Creek Inn was located was very dark and dangerous, and with many student apartments, students walked along the roadway in the evening. She asked staff to look at the potential of adding street lights or an interim shoulder along the road. She understood students were walking along the road to get to Providence Road and ultimately University of Missouri property.
Ms. Nauser stated a homeowners association had provided her a list of sidewalk gaps for which they wanted City assistance with in addressing the issues. She noted she would provide the list to staff and thought she might receive one or two others, which she would pass along.
Ms. Nauser pointed out she had a lot of angry and upset constituents with regard to the transmission lines being constructed in the southwest part of the community, and asked staff to provide a report, which include the history and future time line of the project. She wanted the dates and places of the interested parties meetings and public hearings, the potential issues, if applicable, to the City's bond rating and funding should a new route be determined, the benefits versus costs of Option A versus Option B, the impact of changing the scope of the project to Option B, and the time line of the project to include the second
19

City Council Minutes ­ 10/5/15 Meeting
phase, which would connect the McBaine substation at Highpoint Lane to be included in the report. She understood many people thought that section of the power lines would not be constructed so there would not be power lines by Rock Bridge Elementary School.
Ms. Nauser provided the list that summarized her requests of staff. Mr. Trapp stated a constituent had contacted him about his experience calling the utility customer line. The constituent had had a long wait, was disconnected, and then had another long wait, and had indicated this was a regular occurrence. He asked for information regarding wait times. Mr. Matthes replied the Council approved the addition of two people for that exact purpose so the situation should improve. Mr. Ruffin explained he was continuing to work with the Columbia Alliance to Combat Homelessness (CATCH), and this group was meeting with neighborhood associations tomorrow at 6:30 p.m. at Jefferson Middle School to hear their concerns and respond to questions. He thought this issue would come to Council at its next meeting. Mayor McDavid understood Columbia was at $97.50, which was higher in terms of the cost of living than any other community in Missouri, but less than the $100.00 national average. He noted the utility costs were at $106.10, and thought the City owed its citizens an explanation. The meeting adjourned at 9:13 p.m.
Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
20

