City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI NOVEMBER 2, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, November 2, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN and TRAPP were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meetings of October 5, 2015 and October 19, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Mr. Trapp.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Mayor McDavid asked that R175-15 be moved from the consent agenda to new business per the request of staff.
The agenda, including the consent agenda with R175-15 being moved to new business, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Ms. Nauser.
SPECIAL ITEMS
None.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
None.
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Angela Speck - The total solar eclipse that will pass over Columbia on August 21, 2017 and planning for the tourist that will come to town as a result.
Ms. Speck provided a handout and explained there would be a total solar eclipse on August 21, 2017 in Columbia, Missouri. She noted the last time there had been a total solar eclipse on the continental United States was in 1979, the last one that had come across the continental United States was in 1918, and the last one to cross Missouri was more than two centuries ago. This would likely be the only chance for many people to view a total solar eclipse in their lifetime. She showed an animation of how it would travel over the United States and Missouri. The longest duration of the eclipse would be in Hopkinsville, Kentucky, at 2 minutes and 42 seconds of darkness, and Columbia, Missouri would be very close at 2 minutes and 36 seconds of darkness. She believed many people would come to Columbia to see the event, and the entire event of the moon staring to move to cover the sun until the moon then moved past the sun to the other side would take about two hours. Based on past travel due to eclipses and where people would likely travel, she thought 400,000 people
1

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
would visit Columbia. She was not sure the City was ready in terms of hotel rooms, traffic, emergencies, food, etc. She noted the eclipse would occur in the middle of the day and believed this could bring a lot of money into the City if handled correctly. She urged the Council to form a task force which included emergency services, the Chamber of Commerce, the Convention and Visitors Bureau, etc. so the City was ready for the event.
Lynn Maloney, Race Matters ­ Commending the creation of the Community Outreach Unit in relation to the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence.
Ms. Maloney stated she was with Race Matters and explained on October 23, the Police Department's outreach unit had described their work as re-doing the Department's community policing effort of the 1990's and their goals as being directed by the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She did not believe a unit whose mission was carried out by only two officers could meet those recommendations as they were department-wide initiatives, and included aggressively addressing the trust gap between the African-American community and police, moving toward a community policing model, cultural competency training for all officers, moving beyond responsive policing and positively engaging the community, attracting and training officers through professional development that rewarded the skills of relationship building, community involvement, and cultural competency, incentivizing officers to live in the neighborhoods where they served. She commented that community policing was a way of doing business by an entire police force, and not just a specialized unit of that force, and pointed out it was defined as a philosophy that promoted organizational strategies that supported the systematic use of partnerships and problem-solving techniques to proactively address the immediate conditions that give rise to public safety issues, such as crime, social disorder, and fear of crime. The Department of Justice's community-oriented police services indicated community policing was built on community partnerships, problem-solving, and organizational transformation. On August 20, the Columbia Police Department participated in a training that had focused on the need for procedural justice within a department before officers could be expected to engage procedural justice on the street. The focus of the training was on organizational leadership, building a mission and vision statement, and recruiting and training service-oriented officers. She stated organizational commitment was required for community policing to work. She commented that the officers of community outreach unit had shared they had been accused by other officers of being social workers with a gun, and that statement showed the Police Department had not yet fulfilled organizational transformation. She noted the community outreach unit was staffed by dedicated and hard-working officers, whose efforts were in alignment with the visions of the Task Force in terms of what was possible for the entire Police Department, but that unit was not equivalent to community policing or a satisfactory answer to the recommendations of the Task Force. She asked for fulfillment of the Task Force recommendations for community policing. She commented that without procedural justice, police intervention could easily devolve into racial profiling, excessive use of force, and other practices that would disregard civil rights and cause negative reactions from people living in already challenged communities. Community policing improved public safety and enhanced social connectivity and economic strength, which in turn increased community
2

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
resilience to crime. It also improved job satisfaction for officers. She stated Columbia deserved and needed best practices for policing.
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp ­ Community policing and outreach.
Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp explained she was with Race Matters and felt there was miscommunication with regard to community policing as she did not believe they all had the same definition or expectations. She thought they needed to come to a mutual agreement on how community policing was defined. She stated she viewed it as a philosophy in terms how people were treated. She understood police staffing was a part of it, and believed the police should be funded with a dedicated revenue stream similar to infrastructure. She commented that she was not satisfied with the document associated with the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence as it did not make sense to her. She understood the City had a document that told the public exactly how much was spent on social services, and thought it would be helpful to know how well the City was doing with policing in terms of the dollars spent along with the obstacles, challenges, etc. She noted there were issues of continuity and the fact minorities had the worst outcomes in all categories. She reiterated she believed there was miscommunication in terms of what they wanted with regard to community policing, and did not feel everyone needed was at the table for these conversations. She hoped everyone was included in future meetings, to include black churches, leaders, homeschool communicators, etc. She thought whoever was in charge of ensuring this transformation needed to circulate within the community as they could not expect those impacted by poverty or crime to always come to the City. She commented that she was interested in a review each agency in terms of challenges and barriers to success, and how each could get groups to interact more integrally with each other as there was a lot of redundancy and lack of communication. She believed this would assist in reducing violence issues in terms of children.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction of sanitary sewer improvements along Providence Road from 125 feet south of Stewart Road to Turner Avenue and along Turner Avenue to Fourth Street, more specifically described as the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2.
Item A was read by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Trapp made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 2. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote.
(B) Construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle.
Item B was read by the Clerk.
3

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this would connect to other sidewalks. Mr. Nichols replied yes. Mr. Skala understood this had been on the capital improvement project list. Mr. Nichols replied it had been a part of the 2005 ballot issue. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, explained this was in her neighborhood and she was sure all of her neighbors were happy as they had wanted this for almost ten years. There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Ms. Nauser commented that this project showed City government did not work quickly. She noted this was City-owned property and believed the City needed to follow its own rules in terms of constructing sidewalks when property was developed. She was happy this would be finished within the next few months. Mr. Skala explained he had opposed the 2005 capital improvement ballot issue as an activist because he did not feel the right people had been included in discussing priorities, but noted he was happy some of the projects had been funded and would support this project. Mr. Thomas stated he supported this project and commented that the fact it took ten years suggested they had inadequate funding sources for sidewalks. Ms. Nauser made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the sidewalk and stormwater improvements on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
(C) Replacing existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting. B307-15 Authorizing the replacement of existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Item C was read by the Clerk, and B307-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser asked how long they expected to receive the savings and fort the life expectancy of LED lights. Mr. Griggs understood they would see a savings of $24,000 per year once all of the lights were replaced. Ms. Nauser asked when the lights would have to be replaced as she wanted to know the projected time frame for the savings. Mr. Griggs replied he did not know. Mr. Trapp asked about the natatorium. Mr. Griggs replied it was the pool, and the work for it would be contracted out because a specific lift was needed for those lights. Mr. Skala understood the lifespans of the LED lights was dependent on the number of times they were turned on and off. Mr. Griggs commented that many of the priorities were those lights that were left on all of the time. Mr. Thomas asked for the upfront installation cost of the LED lights. Mr. Griggs replied $89,000. Mr. Thomas understood the City would then save $24,000 per year so the payback time would be less than four years.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters understood the project was also eligible for $11,000 in rebates from the Water and Light Department's lighting incentive program and asked for clarification. Mr. Griggs replied they would apply for the rebates, and any money they received would be put toward enhancing the lighting replacement plan. Mr. Matthes explained this program would pay for part of the cost if specific products were purchased. Mr. Thomas understood it would be an internal transfer of funds. Mr. Matthes noted this was done for any customer.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Trapp stated he thought it was great they were using one-time funds for maximum benefit, but was concerned about investing in items with the highest rates of return in terms of energy-efficiency because it would almost guarantee they would not invest in the ones with longer rates of return. He thought a systematic process might be better, and suggested packaging energy-efficiency savings so the ones with a four year return could help defray the costs of the ones with longer rates of return. He explained he did not fault this process because it was an opportunistic move to take advantage of one-time funds in an effective way. He asked that staff put together packages of energy-efficiency projects with varying rates of paybacks so they could attain a greater overall energy-efficiency savings. Mr. Skala commented that he was not sure maximizing the benefit discouraged energy-efficiency because there was a commitment on behalf of the City to look at energy savings as a package. They were always concerned with balancing the budget, and one way was through finding efficiencies. He thought this project fit within that goal. Mayor McDavid commented that he believed citizens expected government to act in a fiscally frugal and responsible manner, and this investment, which would be paid back in less than four years, made sense. He did not, however, believe they needed to pat themselves on the back for it as he felt it was expected. He understood this would be eligible for $11,000 in rebates of taxpayer money that came from the water and light bills of customers of the utilities, and did not feel that was necessary. He did not believe they should take revenue from the most expensive utility in the State of Missouri to reduce the costs of this project even further. He noted this fed into his skepticism of the wide array of rebates and incentives offered by the Water and Light Department. He reiterated he did not feel it was necessary. He thought these programs needed to be reviewed at a higher level by the Water and Light Department, the Water and Light Advisory Board, and a future City Council. Mr. Thomas understood the purpose of the rebates was to encourage private and public customers of the utility to move to a more efficient mode of living and operating so less energy was used and the City, as a whole, did not have to spend money to import dirty energy from coal plants. The $11,000 was a part of a program designed to influence energy choices. He thought it was a valid use of ratepayer funds to create an efficient community. B307-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
5

OLD BUSINESS

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

PR136-15 Establishing a revised policy relating to the repair, maintenance and restoration of brick paved streets in the City of Columbia.

The policy resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas thanked the Council for supporting his motion to previously table this to allow the Disabilities Commission to review it. Mr. Skala commented that he had recently attended a successful festival in Fulton, Missouri, which was based around brick streets. He thought this was a measured attempt to preserve some history without going too far in terms of digging up and rebuilding streets. He appreciated the input of all that weighed in on it and thought it was something they should endorse. The vote on PR136-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Policy resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

B295-15 Amending Chapter 20 of the City Code as it relates to the schedule of fees for processing rezoning applications from any district to district R-1.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if staff would consider waiving fees when downzoning to R-2 in addition to R-1 as it was an interim step that would not require people to give up all of the value in their property and might encourage people to downzone to conform more to the community standard. Mr. Teddy replied he thought it would be up to Council to decide if they believed that type of zoning change to be worth the incentive. He noted any rezoning action had a $300 application fee and a $125 advertising fee. He suggested Council not waive the advertising fee because it was an outside cost and could become burdensome if a large volume of downzonings were received. Mr. Thomas asked how this ordinance related to elements of the Comprehensive Plan. Mr. Teddy replied it was viewed as something for neighborhood preservation as there could be areas or streets in the City where the zoning did not match the actual use or the actual potential of the property. He noted there could be lots that were too small or narrow to support a second dwelling unit, and a person downzoning would view it as preserving the character of the neighborhood. He stated it would not be a one size fits all situation as some street corners might support higher densities from a planning perspective. He pointed out there could be some financial impacts as four unrelated adults could reside on R-2 zoned property, while only three unrelated adults could reside on R-1 zoned property. Mr. Thomas commented that he was also interested in providing the option of waiving the fee for those downzoning from R-3 to R-2 or R-1. Mr. Thomas asked if properties that were commercially zoned would be eligible for the waiver of the fee if they downzoned to R-1. Mr. Teddy replied yes. He explained staff had discussed many options and had decided to propose something that was simple in structure for Council consideration. This would apply to any rezoning to R-1, which was the most
6

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
restrictive district. Mr. Thomas asked how he would feel about modifying the ordinance to make it applicable to only currently zoned residential properties. Mr. Teddy replied it was something they would need to review. He noted there could be commercially zoned properties that were used residentially.
Mr. Skala understood these would be reviewed on a case by case basis regardless of whether they were commercial or residential. Mr. Teddy stated the fee would not indicate whether they were in favor of any particular zoning change. Each rezoning would be evaluated on its own merits through the Planning and Zoning Commission and City Council process. Mr. Thomas asked if the Planning and Zoning Commission would review whether to waive the fee on a case by case basis. Mr. Teddy replied no. The merits of the rezoning would be evaluated on a case by case basis.
Ms. Peters asked if this included agriculturally zoned land. Mr. Teddy replied yes, and explained the ordinance currently waived the fee for any change from A-1 to R-1.
Mr. Skala understood a rezoning from A-1 to R-1 was upzoning as it could be denser. Mr. Teddy stated that was dependent upon how it was viewed because agricultural zoning could include some commercial activity on a large enough site. A-1 uses tended to be benign within the City limits, but could include commercial activities related to agriculture.
Ms. Peters asked if it would be worth tabling a decision to allow time to review an R-3 to R-2 downzoning as well as the A-1 zoning. Mr. Teddy replied yes.
Mary Ratliff, 211 Park de Ville Drive, encouraged the Council to table this issue as this would affect people's property. She hoped they would take more time to review the issue before making a final decision, and did not know if two weeks would provide enough time for staff to research the issue.
Mark Farnen, 103 E. Brandon Road, commented that this bill was fairly innocuous on its face, but he believed the bill had the potential to do more. It would eliminate the application fee for downzoning requests and would allow those requests to be made at any time throughout the year. He understood staff had indicated this was in keeping with a policy established in 1993 that provided this type of relief as a protection for neighborhoods. He believed the relief and downzoning process in the original policy resolution had been intended to be used by a group of homes, and not single applicants, as it took a group of homes to make a neighborhood as opposed to a single property. The intent was to protect neighborhoods, and not to insulate an isolated piece. Language in this bill did not make that distinction and would allow for individual applications. The language in this bill also discussed the nullification of the earlier ordinance, which ensconced the idea of neighborhood protection. He commented that the problem with a single applicant approach was that it did not promote neighborhoods, and could be used to inhibit the fair use of nearby properties depending on what was done with the adoption of the new zoning code. He noted the new zoning code had some provisions in module 3 that allowed someone with an R-1 zoned property to make an objection against an R-3 zoned property, forcing the R-3 zoned property to reduce its footprint. This created an unfair advantage for the R-1 zoned property or at least nullified some of the available use of the R-3 zoned property. He understood the new code had not yet been adopted, but pointed out the purpose of the new code was to ensure all of the pieces fit together. He felt the passage of this bill tonight would highjack that
7

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
process and would potentially establish a rule that would artificially favor the rights of a single property owner over another property owner. He thought this should not be considered until the after the new zoning code was finalized so they knew the impact. He also believed it should be given more thought.
Mr. Skala stated he was not sure a mechanism existed for neighborhoods to make these decisions and thought it had to be done on a property by property basis. He agreed this needed to be more thoroughly reviewed. He understood Mr. Farnen wanted to ensure equity between property rights for the potential for developing property, the neighborhood, and individual properties. Mr. Farnen replied that was correct. He reiterated the draft zoning code suggested an R-1 zoned property had the ability to reduce the footprint of what was built on the R-3 zoned property by reducing the height, setbacks, etc., which provided an unfair advantage of the R-1 zoned property owner. It would not necessarily protect the neighborhood, and would protect or insulate a single property. He thought that was an injustice to the rights of the other property owner.
Dan Cullimore, 715 Lyon Street, encouraged the Council to table this issue. He appreciated the comments of Mr. Farnen although he did not necessarily agree with that position as he thought there was just as much of a chance for an R-3 zoned property to have detrimental consequences for an R-1 use. He commented that fundamentally, there was a real question with regard to what the highest and best use for a property was with the new development code. He wondered which property owner's highest and best use would take precedent.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, stated he believed this issue should be tabled to obtain more input. He commented that property north of Broadway had been blanket upzoned in 1969, and was certain the person that owned his house, which was built in 1913 as a single-family home, had not asked for it. He understood they might not have objected, but they had not asked for it. He felt there had been negative consequences to that decision as many homes had been divided into multiple apartments, and many homes were now gone because the City lacked code compliance enforcement. The rental code compliance ordinance had not been established until 1979. He believed the right to downzone at no cost or at a minimal $50 per parcel cost was a matter of equity. He commented that the use value of his home was his use. The comments of Mr. Farnen were biased toward the idea of an investor, which was a use value, but the use value to most people in his neighborhood was in living there. He suggested low fees for downzoning.
Mr. Skala asked if this issue had been referred to the Planning and Zoning Commission for its consideration. Mr. Teddy replied no. He explained it was not part of the zoning chapter, but noted they could be consulted. Mr. Skala thought their input might be helpful in terms of downzoning, the necessity of an interim step, etc.
Mr. Skala made a motion to table B295-15 to the December 7, 2015 Council Meeting to allow time for staff and the Planning and Zoning Commission to consider the concerns and revisions suggested. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote.
8

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
B303-15 Appropriating funds for the Transit Service Analysis and Planning Assistance project.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked if the scope of work included ancillary items related to transit, such as bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied the consultant would conduct a complete operational analysis of the system so they would look at everything. Mr. Thomas asked if a long term master plan and funding sustainability plan for the system would be developed by the consultant. Mr. Brooks replied yes. Mr. Thomas asked if the proposal by Olsson Associates was a public document that could be accessed and shared. Ms. Thompson replied it would be an open record after the contract was awarded, but not while it was in the negotiation process. Mr. Skala asked if it could be released to the City Council, and not publically released. Ms. Thompson replied she thought there might be a way for the Council to access it. Mr. Thomas stated he had seen it as staff had provided it to him and had told him it could not be provided to anyone else until a certain time. Mr. Skala stated he would like a copy. Ms. Peters asked what other cities had received services from this company. Mr. Brooks replied Lawrence, Kansas, Ames, Iowa, Manhattan, Kansas, etc. Ms. Peters understood they had worked with other college towns. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Ms. Peters asked when the report would be completed. Mr. Brooks replied it would take 14 months for all deliverables, but would be completed in phases. He thought the operational analysis would be completed in the first four months. Cheryl Price, 511 Parkade Boulevard, stated she was Chair of the Public Transit Advisory Commission (PTAC) and thanked Mr. Thomas for getting this project started and City staff for its work. She commented that she had been involved in the process from the beginning as a member of the selection committee and in reviewing the scope of work. She noted Olsson Associates had provided an excellent proposal as they would provide shortterm, mid-term, and long-term evaluations and funding sustainability recommendations. She pointed out other funding sources would be necessary if they wanted to enhance transit services. She stated the PTAC wanted to be involved with this process from the beginning to the end, and noted she was happy to see all of the proposals including the PTAC throughout the process. She thought Olsson Associates would do an excellent job. She explained the PTAC believed a true transit philosophy was need for Columbia, and that it should be built around social equity. She thanked the Council for its work and asked them to vote in favor of this appropriation. Mr. Thomas understood Olsson Associates had worked with Lawrence, Kansas, which he believed was an interesting model because they had expanded their transit system dramatically around 2008-2009 by simultaneously passing a City-wide sales tax to improve transit for the community and a student activity fee at the University of Kansas to improve student-oriented routes. He commented that it was hard to understand how great an amenity a good transit system, with buses every fifteen minutes to and from convenient locations, was when living in a town with a deeply underfunded public transit system. He stated they ended up spending a lot more money on building and maintaining roadways as a result. He
9

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
encouraged those traveling to other towns to view the transit systems in those communities. He noted communities were improving their transit systems, especially college towns, and Columbia needed to do this as well.
Mr. Skala if the University of Missouri was or would be involved in this process. Mr. Brooks replied yes. He noted they had been involved in the selection process and would be involved in the forthcoming process. Mr. Skala thought their involvement was absolutely critical. He noted the current transportation sales tax was split three ways between road repair, the airport, and transit, and all of these were essential needs. He believed it was essential to hire a consultant to help get a handle on transit needs so they could put something in place that would be effective.
B303-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B313-15 Amending Chapter 22 to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159 relating to residential refuse collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential refuse collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential roll cart refuse pick-up; to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159.1 relating to residential recycling collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential recycling collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential recycling roll cart pick-up. B315-15 Calling a special election to consider an initiative ordinance requiring the existing residential refuse and recycling collector and rate systems be maintained, prohibiting roll carts for residential refuse and recycling collection, and prohibiting the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential refuse and recycling roll cart pick-up.
The bills were given second reading by the Clerk. Ms. Thompson provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas understood this would prohibit not only the use of roll carts, but would also prohibit pay-as-you-throw using purely a bag system. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct. She noted if the Council adopted the ordinance or the voters approved the ordinance, the Council was prohibited from making alterations to the ordinance for six months unless it was done by the unanimous vote of the City Council. Ms. Peters asked how long this would be in effect if approved by the voters. She wondered if it was a permanent decision. Ms. Thompson replied the Council would not be able to make any alterations for six months. Mr. Skala asked if any alteration after six months would take a unanimous decision. Ms. Thompson replied no, and clarified a unanimous vote was required for any alteration within six months. Mr. Matthes pointed out the ordinance included the correct election date of March 15, 2016. The council memo had a typographical error of March 16, 2016. The ordinance as written had the correct date. Mr. Ruffin asked if roll carts would automatically be approved if this issue was defeated by the vote of the people. Ms. Thompson replied no. She explained Council would decide how to move forward in the future, and it could remain the status quo. Ms. Peters understood the Council could then do bags or roll carts. Mr. Skala understood it could be any option. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that he thought this was a waste of money in terms of the cost of the election, the cost of new trucks, and the cost for other changes. He noted the public had indicated it did not want roll carts. He suggested the health issue be considered in terms of mosquitos and the West Nile disease because of people not cleaning their roll carts.
Mary Ratliff, 211 Park de Ville Drive, asked the Council to vote in favor of the ordinance and to not send the issue to the voters. She noted her neighbor had a steep hill and she could not imagine her trying to get the roll cart up and down the hill in bad weather. She wondered where she would even store the roll carts at her home. She believed many older people would have issues with the roll carts and asked the Council to do what was right for the citizens. She noted the majority of the citizens she had talked with were not in favor of roll carts and did not feel the issue should go to the voters.
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, pointed out the City offered a program by which City employees would assist with taking the trash to the curb with certain documentation.
Joan Wilcox, 1000 Madison Street, commented that she lived in a rental and did not have any outdoor water so it would be difficult for her to clean her roll cart. She noted there was a lot to consider, particularly with older rental properties, the elderly, and hills.
Mr. Skala stated he was personally torn with regard to this decision as he saw the benefits of roll carts in terms of workers compensation and efficiencies of economies, but also saw the benefits of the current system and the drawbacks of roll carts in terms of storage and the cleaning of roll carts. He commented that he would prefer to not vote or to send this to the vote of the people, but noted he had to represent the Third Ward constituents, and at least two-thirds or three-quarters of the people at the informational sessions he had attended had indicated they were supportive of this ordinance. He stated he would vote for the ordinance, and hoped the Council would send the issue to the voters.
Mayor McDavid stated he had great faith in the citizens and would vote to send this issue to the voters in March.
Mr. Trapp commented that he was re-elected based on his support for roll cart choice. He stated he supported a hybrid system as he sympathized with those that had long gravel driveways, those with steep driveways, and those with storage issues in not wanting a roll cart, but noted he felt it was unfair to not allow him to have a roll cart. The compelling argument for him involved worker safety. There was a 45 percent annual turnover rate because people did not want to stay with the job since it was physically demanding and they were out in the elements. Weaving in and out of traffic was inherently dangerous and life threatening behavior. He pointed out the workers compensation claims had a human element of someone experiencing medical issues, and they, as representatives of City government, had a role to play for City staff in addition to constituents, as their lives were influenced and risks were taken due to policies that Council set. He stated those powers as a policymaker weighed heavily on him and he was not comfortable taking a show of hands from only those that attended a public meeting. Those that submitted the petition had an amazing amount of energy, enthusiasm, and organizing capacity, and based on the number of signatures, there was a significant portion of people that had issues with roll carts. He reiterated he had some sympathy and understanding for those not wanting a roll cart, but did
11

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
not believe it should prohibit him or others like him, who had concerns about worker safety, animals in the trash, etc., to not have roll carts. He understood some felt roll carts were ugly, but noted others felt trash bags were ugly, and believed the aesthetic argument paled in comparison to the safety of the work force. He pointed out the three online polls showed people were in favor of roll carts. In general, those opposed to something were more active and online poles were unscientific. He suggested they allow the citizens to vote on this issue as he did not believe Columbia was universally opposed to roll carts.
Mr. Thomas explained he spent a long Monday morning a couple of months ago with two solid waste collection teams in the East Campus area and in the Fourth Ward, and it was a physically demanding and dangerous job. Based upon that experience, he did not feel comfortable with restricting a technology that could improve the safety of workers. As a result, he stated he would not support the ordinance as written, and believed the vote of the people was the best way to proceed. He suggested a good education campaign between now and March so everyone voted with the full knowledge of all of the different aspects of this decision.
Ms. Nauser agreed that those attending the informational meeting were those that leaned toward not having roll carts. In her conversations with constituents, there were many people that were equally supportive of roll carts. She noted she was not necessarily against or in favor of roll carts, and believed they should look at the technology or consider a blended system. She pointed out she was, however, supportive of a pay-as-you-throw system, whether it was accomplished with bags or roll carts. She stated her 78 year old father, who had roll carts for trash and recycling, loved them, and pushed them up the incline of his driveway in Wentzville, Missouri where there was the same climatic experiences as there was in Columbia. She thought this issue should go to the vote of the people.
Mr. Ruffin stated he wished those in favor of roll carts were equally as passionate and organized as those who were against them. In speaking with individuals one on one, this was an issue that had divided the community. It was amazing to him that this was the hot topic currently. He thought it was appropriate to send this issue to the voters to make the decision. He noted he was concerned about technology, worker safety, etc. so he would vote against the ordinance as written and would vote in favor of sending it to the vote of the people. He pointed out allowing it to go the vote of the people would provide the opportunity to pursue a hybrid system or an alternative plan that was not as stringent as the ordinance as written.
B313-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA. VOTING NO: THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. Bill declared defeated.
B315-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.
12

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

B296-15
B297-15 B298-15 B299-15 B300-15 B302-15
B304-15
B305-15 B306-15 B308-15
B309-15 B310-15 B311-15 B312-15 R168-15

Approving the Final Plat of Barcus Ridge, Plat No. 2 located on the north side of Old Plank Road and southwest of the intersection of Route K and Old Plank Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations as it relates to direct driveway access on Old Plank Road subject to conditions.
Approving the Final Plat of Creeks Edge, Plat No. 3 located along Sawgrass Drive, west of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Vacating sewer and electric easements located on the northeast corner of Broadway and William Street (1601, 1605, 1701 and 1705 Broadway); accepting conveyances for sewer purposes.
Authorizing the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of an easement for the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63.
Authorizing a right of use permit with The Board of Trustees of Boone County Hospital to allow for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private irrigation system built in a portion of the Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard rights-of-way.
Authorizing an Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreement Partial Performance Acknowledgement of Hinkson Creek Physical Habitat Assessment with the County of Boone and The Curators of the University of Missouri as it relates to the collaborative adaptive management implementation (CAM) process to address the total maximum daily load (TMDL) for Hinkson Creek.
Vacating a portion of a water utility easement adjacent to Lot 2 and Lot 3 within Horse Fair Subdivision located on the north side of Oakland Gravel Road.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing a cooperative agreement with the Greenbelt Land Trust of Mid-Missouri for the FY 2016 implementation phase of the "Our Natural Legacy: A Plan for Columbia and Boone County" open space/green infrastructure project.
Authorizing an agreement with Green Valley Rifle & Pistol Club, Inc. for range facility access and use by the Columbia Police Department for official scheduled training.
Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for the Youth Leadership in Tobacco Prevention program; appropriating funds.
Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for HIV prevention; appropriating funds.
Authorizing Amendment No. 2 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Eating Active Living in Local Communities program; appropriating funds.
Setting a public hearing: replacement and upgrade of water mains along a portion of Sixth Street between Elm Street and Broadway, and transferring

13

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
all fire hydrants and customer services along a portion of Broadway between Fourth Street and Seventh Street.

R169-15

Setting a public hearing: renovation of the Lake of the Woods Clubhouse to include ADA upgrades and energy-efficient improvements.

R170-15

Setting a public hearing: construction of security upgrades to the Columbia Police Department building located at 600 E. Walnut Street.

R171-15

Authorizing agreements for FY 2016 Signature Series Funding under the Tourism Development Program; transferring tourism development funds to the Parks and Recreation Department for the Heritage Festival.

R172-15

Authorizing an agreement with Columbia Eve Fest, Inc. for support of the New Year's Eve event in downtown Columbia; authorizing the City Manager to provide City support services.

R173-15

Authorizing an educational affiliation agreement with Chamberlain College of Nursing, LLC to provide health clinical experience and instruction for nursing students.

R174-15

Authorizing a contract with the Central Missouri Humane Society for 2016 animal control and municipal shelter services.

R176-15 Adopting the Boone County Hazard Mitigation Plan.

R177-15

Authorizing the public sale of Special Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2015.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS
R175-15 Authorizing the purchase of equipment from Civic Recycling to be used by the Utilities Department ­ Solid Waste Division.
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood this was recycled recycling equipment. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct. Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend R175-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Ms. Nauser and approved unanimously by voice vote. Mr. Trapp commented that his employer had been a customer of civic recycling, and it was unfortunate to see them go out of business. He noted the City's solid waste division had been criticized for the rates charged, but this pointed to the difficulties in this industry and that government did have a role in solid waste. The private market struggled to do things that had more than a bottom line component even though he would argue recycling had a huge bottom line component by diverting items from the waste stream, which had a cost in itself and through resale values. Recycling also provided a social good. He was pleased the City was able to take the opportunity to get equipment at a good price and ensure the continuity of services of those with commercial contracts.

14

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala understood the industry was having great difficulty due to prices for recyclables being down, and asked how that had affected the City's system. He wondered if it had diminished the City's capacity to look toward the future to develop this as a resource. Ms. Mitchell replied it would become more expensive. It would cost more to process and there would be less revenue when sent elsewhere. She noted the market fluctuated and had been lower in 2008 at which point they were paying to get rid of recycling materials. It had not approached the 2008 level yet.
The vote on R175-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
R178-15 Approving the Preliminary Plat of Bear Creek Vistas located on the east side of Creasy Spring Road and north of Prairie Lane (3628 N. Creasy Springs Road).
The resolution was read by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser understood the new proposed road would connect to another subdivision, and asked when that subdivision would be built. Mr. Teddy replied it would depend on how fast the lots sold and other financial factors. Ms. Nauser commented that Creasy Springs Road was not on the next 10-year capital improvement project list, and she envisioned an increase in traffic on that road due to the new connection. She asked if this had been discussed as she did not believe they wanted additional traffic on Creasy Springs Road and was concerned with approving this preliminary plat for that reason. She asked if anything would be done to keep traffic away from Creasy Springs Road. Mr. Teddy replied the Major Roadway Plan called for Blue Ridge Road to extend all of the way to Creasy Springs Road, north of the curve, so that connection would be made. This would be built as a local residential street. Staff could take a closer look and forecast trips if the connection was fully made at both ends. Ms. Nauser stated she did not envision anyone taking a right out of the new subdivision and thought people would likely take the new connection to Creasy Springs Road, which would put traffic right at the curve. She did not think she could support more traffic to Creasy Springs Road until the road was straightened, and approval of the preliminary plat would obligate them to approve the final plat. Mr. Teddy noted an option would be to grant a variance to allow a private driveway access. He thought staff likely considered this, but felt it would not be keeping with the ordinance as it could create a lost opportunity for the connection through the neighborhood since there would be a long interval between Prairie Lane and the Blue Ridge Road extension. Mr. Trapp asked if Salamander Lane could connect to Blue Ridge Road if it was extended and if Creasy Springs Road had not yet been realigned. Mr. Teddy replied another possibility was for it to terminate on the south end either permanently of on a temporary basis, depending on how the overall roadway plan shaped up. He noted there was a lot in play. They could look at existing conditions only as current conditions would call for a street that only connected to Creasy Springs Road since the Blue Ridge Road extension was not yet complete or for a cul-de-sac.
15

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Skala stated he was uncomfortable with this preliminary plat as well as the curve was dangerous, and understood there might be other options to make different connections to avoid placing more traffic on to Creasy Springs Road until it was made to be safer.
Mayor McDavid asked how many homes would be in this subdivision. Mr. Teddy replied three. One already existed and two would be constructed. Mayor McDavid understood the traffic count on Creasy Springs Road was 2,500 vehicles per day. Mr. Teddy stated he was not certain, but thought that was close as it was a low volume road.
Ms. Nauser asked if they knew what the traffic count would increase to if Blue Ridge Road was extended and this new street was constructed as she was more concerned about the future than today. Mr. Teddy replied no.
Ron Lueck, 914 N. College Avenue, stated he was with Lueck Surveying and explained he had prepared the preliminary plat and the final plat at the direction of City staff. J.D. Kelly had purchased the lot in 2010, and at the time, it had a house, a shack, a mobile home, and junk cars. He noted Mr. Kelly had cleaned up the lot by removing the shack and mobile home, and rehabilitating the house with a desire to recoup his investment by selling the house. In August, they had tried to do a tract split to sell only the house, but that was not satisfactory to City staff. They then moved in the direction of this preliminary plat. He pointed out a 2006 plan showed Creasy Springs Road as a cul-de-sac at some point. A 2007 plan showed the road going through a duplex structure on the corner of Creasy Springs Road, which they then tried but City staff did not like it. They then reverted to this layout, which by default would create two other lots the owner had no intention of developing at this time since the construction of the road was cost prohibitive for only two lots. He reiterated the owner was only trying to sell the one acre lot with the house, which had frontage on Creasy Springs Road with a driveway. He explained that when this property came into the City a year after it was purchased, it had three driveways and three newly installed 40-foot long culverts. The northern driveway was not safe so they would have a triangular easement to use the middle drive to get to this particular piece of property. He noted Salamander Lane would be a part of the entire Creasy Springs Road relocation project. It would not stand on its own. The Blue Ridge Road extension and Creasy Springs Road relocation projects would have to take place before Salamander Lane was constructed.
Mr. Trapp commented that there were a lot of moving pieces, and approving this would honor the facts on the ground. This person had purchased a property with a lot of negatives and had taken steps to clean up the area and eliminate two of the three driveways. The property owner had hoped for a simpler process, but City staff had taken a broader view on the situation. City staff was not only looking at the current facts as they were looking at interconnectivity for the future as well. He noted he did not believe the Willow Falls subdivision would move quickly. The City had raised the cost of what it took to build a house, and there was a threshold for what people would pay for a house north of I-70 due to crime perceptions, and development had slowed down in the Second Ward, which had created a situation where plans were not moving forward in a timely manner. It was a cautionary tale of the limits of long-range planning. He stated he would hate to see this voted down since the property owner only wanted to divide the lot and City staff only wanted to protect the long term interests of the City in terms of neighborhood connectivity. He agreed they did not want
16

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
to dump more cars on to Creasy Springs Road, and noted the extension of Blue Ridge Road was not dependent on this project. He stated he did not believe they would get a lot of people from Salamander Lane even if Blue Ridge Road was extended and the two lots were developed as there were better sight lines elsewhere. He thought they had discretion with regard to granting the access based upon sight lines and traffic engineering studies when it came down to the final plat. He commented that this was a complex issue, and encouraged the Council to approve this preliminary plat as it did justice for the current property owner, recognized the immediate interests, and aligned with the comprehensive plan to ensure connectivity in the future.
Mr. Skala stated this was a problem area due to the curve on Creasy Springs Road, which needed to be addressed, but noted he was inclined to defer to Mr. Trapp, especially in light of the property owner trying to do the right thing, as it was hard to hold someone hostage that was doing the right thing. He took a bit of umbrage with the idea of development slowing down north of I-70 as it was still going strong in northeast Columbia. He suggested they move up the realignment of Creasy Springs Road in the CIP Plan in the future, if necessary, as it was a dangerous road.
Mayor McDavid noted he was convinced by Mr. Trapp's analysis on this issue. He pointed out the Council had asked for traffic calming, signage, etc. with regard to Creasy Springs Road and expected that to be forthcoming in a report. He believed there were ways to address the issues temporarily at a fairly low cost.
Ms. Nauser stated he appreciated Mr. Trapp's explanation with regard to this issue and noted she would defer to his him as well. She hoped the City would look at this area more closely in terms of the next capital improvement ballot initiative. She commented that she had dealt with the traffic and safety issues on Forum Boulevard where Wilson's Total Fitness was located, and it had been a situation of unintended consequences due to previous platting and zoning decisions. She hoped they would heed what they had learned in terms of Forum Boulevard and move more quickly on this area of the community in terms of safety and connectivity. She stated she would support this even though she had concerns.
The vote on R178-15 was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING
The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

B316-15 B317-15 B318-15

Authorizing the issuance of Special Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2015.
Rezoning property located on the northeast corner of John Garry Drive and North Cedar Lake Drive (4804 John Garry Drive) from Districts O-1 and C-1 to District R-3.
Rezoning property located on the west side of Rangeline Street, between Business Loop 70 and Interstate 70 (1413 Rangeline Street), from District C-3 to District M-1.

17

B319-15

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Authorizing construction of sidewalks on the east and south sides of Green Meadows Circle, north of the Fire Station #7 entrance to Greenbriar Drive, and storm water improvements at the corner of Green Meadows Road and Green Meadows Circle; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B320-15

Authorizing construction of the Upper Hinkson Creek Outfall Sewer Extension Phase I Project located along Hinkson Creek from just south of Vandiver Drive to near the northern boundary of the City of Columbia landfill; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B321-15

Authorizing the replacement and upgrade of water mains along a portion of Sixth Street between Elm Street and Broadway, and transferring all fire hydrants and customer services along a portion of Broadway between Fourth Street and Seventh Street; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B322-15 Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.

B323-15

Authorizing the renovation of the Lake of the Woods Clubhouse to include ADA upgrades and energy-efficient improvements; calling for bids for a portion of the project through the Purchasing Division.

B324-15

Authorizing a memorandum of understanding with Columbia Public Schools for the Healthy Eating and Active Living (HEAL) program.

B325-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for maternal child health services.

B326-15

Appropriating asset forfeiture funds for an additional staffing optimization study in the Columbia Police Department for the Investigative Division.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP105-15 Future Use of Red Light Cameras.

Mr. St. Romaine provided a staff report. Mr. Skala asked how many of the accidents from the local data were due to rear end accidents and how many involved fatalities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he did not have that information. Mr. Skala asked if there had been any fatalities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he thought there might have been one fatality. Mr. Skala asked if that was due to running a red light. Mr. St. Romaine replied yes. Mr. Skala asked if that had been recorded on camera. Mr. St. Romaine replied he would need to ensure the fatality was at a red light camera intersection. Mr. Trapp asked for the dates of the City's red light camera program. Mr. St. Romaine replied September 2009 to November 2013. Mayor McDavid understood there had been a decline in accidents after they had stopped the red light camera program. Mr. St. Romaine stated he was not sure everyone in Columbia knew the red light camera program had ended. He thought there had likely been a spillover effect. Mr. Skala stated he thought one camera that was rotated throughout the City might have the same effect. Mr. Thomas noted that was actually done in the United Kingdom in terms of speed cameras. Non-descript gray boxes were placed in many locations whereby

18

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
people could not tell if it included a camera, and the cameras were moved around. He thought it had been a very effective program.
Ms. Nauser understood the fine for running a red light was $120. Mr. St. Romaine stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser thought they should increase fines in order to change behavior, and asked if that had been considered in order to deter bad behavior. She did not feel $120 was enough considering the potential gravity of killing someone by running a red light. Mr. Thomas felt the issue was that it was difficult to catch people that were running the red lights without the cameras. Ms. Nauser understood the rates of people running red lights had decreased because people thought the program still existed, and believed that it would have the same psychological impact if they thought they would get a severe ticket or fine. Mr. Skala suggested they consider larger signs indicating fines would double at monitored intersections. Mr. St. Romaine stated that could be done, but the difficulty was in capturing a violation. They would not want an enforcement officer at the intersection. He explained they knew the bad behavior was occurring and were using technology to help with enforcement. He noted he did not believe red light cameras would cure the situation and agreed there were other ways to curb bad behavior. He thought the Council could raise fines and use red light cameras to capture violations as it would be double deterrent.
Mr. Thomas understood the difference was 1,700 versus 300 in terms of people caught by camera versus a police officer. Mr. St. Romaine noted that was City-wide. Mr. Thomas understood only a small number of violators would be captured with police officers. Mr. St. Romaine explained that was because they would have to be at the right place at the right time, and would have to safely make it through the intersection.
Ms. Nauser asked why they needed to catch anyone if the goal was to deter bad behavior, and noted that made it seem as if this was only being done to generate revenue. Mr. St. Romaine commented that he was not saying no community in the United States was using red light cameras as a revenue producer, but it had not been a money maker in Columbia. From fiscal year 2009 through 2014, the gross red light camera revenue received had been $447,000 at $120 per citation. Payments to Gatso during that same time period totaled $210,000, leaving a net to the City of $237,000. He noted Gatso had conducted all of the intersection surveys, installed all of the conduits at the intersections, installed, operated and maintained the camera systems, and employed people to look at every violation to ensure it was a true violation, which had cost more than $210,000. They had likely lost over $500,000 in Columbia. The cost to Columbia to install its own cameras would be about $735,000.
Mr. Thomas asked how the Gatso business model worked for them. Mr. St. Romaine replied it did not work very well for them in Columbia. Mr. Thomas asked what was different in other cities. Mr. St. Romaine replied he thought it had to do with the community's willingness to install red light cameras. Columbia's contract with Gatso called for the installation of cameras at 16 intersections, but only five were installed once the initial 23 surveys had been completed. Gatso had constantly been suggesting additional surveys. Mr. Thomas understood they had hoped the City would add cameras over time as it would pay for itself once they had enough cameras installed.
19

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Matthes noted many states treated this more like a parking violation than a points on your license situation in that a person was ticketed if anyone drove that person's vehicle through a red light. Mr. Thomas understood Columbia had done that for a while. Mr. Matthes replied it was only done for a short while. Mr. St. Romaine noted the City had lost close to $220,000 per year by trying to ensure the driver owned the vehicle. He pointed out the City had operated under the principle that the driver was the one that was liable for the first four years of the program. They had only ticketed the vehicle owner from August to November of 2013 based on a court case. Mr. Matthes thought 80 percent of the violations caught on camera were never processed because the photograph of the driver did not match the photograph of the owner of the vehicle due to quality or another reason.
Mr. Skala understood paint could be placed on a license plate to obscure the reflection from the flash of the camera without obscuring the license plate by the normal eye. Mr. St. Romaine stated that was correct as it had been tested on the television show, Mythbusters, and appeared to work.
Mr. Thomas understood they could not issue the ticket to the person issued the license plate due to state law. Mr. St. Romaine clarified the license plate and driver had to be captured to try to match them up in order to issue the citation.
Mayor McDavid commented that this was all about public safety for him. He thought the Council was obligated if it added to public safety convincingly, but the data did not support it in this situation. They could speculate on the reason for the decline in intersection accidents after the cameras were removed, but the decline had occurred after the cameras were removed. He suggested they keep this option available for the future in case traffic patterns changed and collisions increased. He believed there was enough resistance community-wide that he needed more compelling evidence of the enhancement to public safety by red light cameras.
Ms. Nauser stated she concurred with Mayor McDavid. She explained she had previously voted against red light cameras and would likely do so again for varying reasons, but did not think they should disregard the use of other solutions to address the issue. She had received an e-mail from a constituent suggesting the review of perception and reaction times for traffic lights. She understood poorly painted street lines also contributed to the problem, and that was an issue at night, especially when it was raining. She thought these items should be reviewed at the problem intersections. She noted other suggestions were larger lenses on the lights or plates on the back to prevent glare. She reiterated she thought these low cost items should be considered first.
Mr. Skala commented that he also agreed with Mayor McDavid. He noted he had previously voted against the cameras as well, and stated he might be willing to change his mind if there was compelling evidence because he believed public safety was paramount. He agreed there were likely other ways to deal with this issue, to include signage. He understood there could be hugely disastrous outcomes from running red lights, but thought many accidents at intersections involved rear end collisions which did not necessarily involve fatalities. He did not believe it was worth an investment in cameras when there were other ways to resolve the issue. He thought a police officer could monitor intersections on an
20

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
occasional and random basis as he understood the City did not have the staffing to do this on a regular basis.
Mr. Thomas commented that 40,000-50,000 people were killed on the roads in the United States every year, and more than one million people were injured in these types of crashes. He felt they had become immunized from these crashes along with the associated devastating injuries and fatalities. He noted there was a rapidly growing movement called Vision Zero, which did not accept the idea of people having to die or be maimed on roadways. Their strategies, which included slowing down traffic and enforcing the law consistently and effectively, had resulted in dramatic reductions in death and injury for motorist, pedestrians, and cyclists in New York. He believed the data in Columbia was compelling and was surprised by the opposition as he did not see the downside to cameras. He understood some had indicated there were low cost alternate solutions, but noted he did not feel there were any costs to the red light cameras based on the structure of the contract. He commented that he was not enthusiastic about a third party company making a business out of an enforcement activity, but the City would have to find $700,000 to launch a similar program. He believed it would be a net benefit to the community to improve enforcement.
Mr. Thomas made a motion directing staff to move forward with legislation amending Chapter 14 of the City Code relating to automatic traffic control systems, red light cameras, in compliance with the recent Supreme Court ruling, and authorizing the City Manager to initiate a request for proposals process for the installation, operation, and administration of a red light system. The motion died for the lack of a second.
Mr. Trapp stated the inability of enforcement due to police staffing issues was the strongest argument of staff as the local safety data showed a decline after the cameras were removed. He agreed with Mayor McDavid in that the data should be monitored for changes. He noted he believed Columbia had acted with honor with regard to red light cameras, but did not feel they should move forward with the camera unless they saw safety data in support of it.
Mr. Skala suggested signs at intersections indicating the dangers at the intersection and reminding people to pay attention to the lights at intersections. Mr. St. Romaine noted they would have to work with MoDOT as every questionable intersection was a MoDOT intersection. Mr. Skala suggested they ask MoDOT as he believed there was power in warning people.
REP106-15 Administrative Public Improvement Project: Rock Quarry Park Improvements.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP107-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that solid waste positions provided low skill employment opportunities, and was concerned about jobs lost due to machines.
21

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting
Mr. Elkin noted a gentleman had fallen off a roof at Old Hawthorne and might never walk again. He thought they needed to consider the accident rate in building larger homes and suggested promoting the building of smaller, green homes.
Greg Ahrens, 1504 Sylvan Lane, explained he had tried to watch recent council meetings live online, and was not sure of the issue except that he moved to Windows 10. He wondered if Silverlight was not compatible with Windows 10. He noted he was able to watch past meetings, but not the live feed. He asked if the City could look into the issue. He also suggested streaming the council meetings on Ustream, Livestream, or something similar for those that did not have cable.
Mr. Ahrens noted fences had been built along the sidewalks on the actual bridge over the Hinkson Creek at Stephens Lake Park, but not at the approaches on both sides, which had steep drop-offs whereby a person in a wheelchair or on a bicycle could fall. He asked if fences could be installed at the approaches as well.
Mr. Thomas thought the City should explore the impact of the total solar eclipse in terms of law enforcement, traffic, and tourism, and suggested the Convention and Visitors Bureau meet with Ms. Speck and make recommendations to the Council on the need for a task force, etc. Mr. Matthes noted the Convention and Visitors Bureau had already met with Ms. Speck. He thought the goal tonight was to ensure everyone was aware of the eclipse.
Mr. Thomas noted the Council had received a letter from the Youth Advisory Council in terms of alternatives to arrests in the juvenile justice system and had recommended a "Wake Up" campaign, which was an implicit bias education campaign, peer courts within schools, encouraging counselors to understand the home backgrounds of students getting into trouble, etc. He thought it was a very good report.
Mr. Skala stated some of them were leaving for the National League of Cities meetings on Wednesday. He noted these were phenomenal meetings and provided a way to connect with other cities to find solutions, etc. He pointed out he would receive a Diamond Certification at the conference on Thursday afternoon, and that anyone wanting to contact him could send an e-mail.
Mr. Trapp commented that he had been contacted by Carrie Gartner regarding the hanging of banners in the Business Loop Community Improvement District (CID) as it would help Mizzou North and the Museum of Art and Archeology. He understood there were actions needed by the Water and Light Department and an ordinance process, and asked staff to move the ordinance along to allow banners in the Business Loop CID.
Mr. Trapp asked citizens to vote to support the City's wonderful parks tomorrow as it was the only way they would be able to add significant new green space, which he believed was the single-most investment a growing community could make. He pointed out projects were spread throughout the City in a really fair and comprehensive way as well.
The meeting adjourned at 10:06 p.m.
22

Respectfully submitted,

City Council Minutes ­ 11/2/15 Meeting

Sheela Amin City Clerk

23

