City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI OCTOBER 19, 2015
INTRODUCTORY The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00
p.m. on Monday, October 19, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID and RUFFIN were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES The minutes of the regular meeting of September 21, 2015 were approved
unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Skala.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA Mayor McDavid noted B301-15 and B314-15 needed to be removed from the agenda,
and B315-15 needed to be added to the introduction and first reading section of the agenda. The agenda, including the consent agenda and B301-15 and B314-15 being removed
from the agenda and B315-15 being added to the introduction and first reading section of the agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Ms. Nauser and a second by Mr. Skala.
SPECIAL ITEMS None.
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS Upon receiving the majority vote of the Council, the following individuals were
appointed to the following Boards and Commissions.
BICYCLE/PEDESTRIAN COMMISSION Boyd, Elke, 2004 N. Parklawn Court, Ward 2, Term to expire July 31, 2018
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2020
CITIZENS POLICE REVIEW BOARD DeBrunce, Val, 6302 Upper Bridle Bend Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Fisher, Andrew, 1510 Richardson Street, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Sheltmire, Steve, 1908 Tremont Court, Ward 4, Term to expire November 1, 2018
CITY OF COLUMBIA NEW CENTURY FUND, INC. BOARD Grabau, Andrew, 701 E. Rockcreek Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire September 30, 2018
1

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
COLUMBIA COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION Fletcher, Michael, 912 Hickory Hill Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire November 1, 2018 Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire November 1, 2018
COLUMBIA VISION COMMISSION Follett, Daniel, 3111 Skylark Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire December 15, 2017 Girouard, Paul, 3306 St. Charles Road, Ward 3, Term to expire December 15, 2016 Marshall, Susan, 601 Westwood Avenue, Ward 4, Term to expire December 15, 2016
COMMISSION ON CULTURAL AFFAIRS Bondeson, William, 913 Leland Ridge Road, Ward 4, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Schmitz, Carol, 2103 Winchester Drive, Ward 2, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Williams, William, 306 Clark Street, Boone County, Term to expire October 31, 2018
HUMAN SERVICES COMMISSION Compton, Tonia, 2801 W. Broadway #T3, Ward 1, Term to expire December 31, 2016
MAYOR'S COUNCIL ON PHYSICAL FITNESS AND HEALTH Ramirez, Jose, 2240 Bennett Springs Drive Apt. 8, Ward 6, Term to expire November 30, 2016
SUBSTANCE ABUSE ADVISORY COMMISSION Borgmeyer, Molly, 25 N. Grace Lane 101, Ward 3, Term to expire October 31, 2018 Priesmeyer, Joseph, 1705 Chapel Hollow Court, Ward 4, Term to expire October 31, 2018
UNIVERSITY OF MISSOURI EXTENSION COUNCIL OF BOONE COUNTY Sallee, Thomas, 2006 Americus Drive, Ward 2, Term to expire March 1, 2017
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT
Sky Jimenez - Response to task force recommendation for providing identification and treatment of mental health issues in the schools.
Ms. Jimenez, 3101 Abbywood Drive, explained she had resided in Columbia since 1971 and had been a teacher and counselor for the Columbia Public Schools. She understood the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence had a recommendation involving children's mental health issues and services. She noted the issue was not identification as every teacher could identify children that needed services. The issues included the lack of services, especially for very young children, the fact only few therapists accepted Medicaid, and transportation to those services. She stated she was excited and encouraged by the Task Force recommendation for the Columbia Public Schools and the City of Columbia to work together on this issue, the sales tax that had passed to help fund these services, and the programs that were currently being developed, such as the Family Access Center for Excellence (FACE), which provided centralized services for children and their families. She commented that children from areas of poverty needed access to the same services as other children, and noted children who were provided services were less likely to become involved
2

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
with crime. She explained that children were also often placed in foster care when families did not receive needed services, and children that were at high risk were more likely to not complete high school and more likely to get involved with crime, which resulted in incarceration that was costly to everyone. She asked the Council to help support and promote programs that provided access to children and families, and to invite Aaron Thompson, the Director of FACE, and Kelly Wallis, the Director of the Boone County Community Services, to speak to the City Council about the programs and needs they now had. She also encouraged the City and Schools to work together to allow therapists to meet with children in school buildings as that would address the issue of transportation. Finally, she asked the Council for support of more and longer summer programs as services were sometimes dropped then because there was not a place to meet.
Pack Matthews ­ Challenge and opportunities before Columbia community, and ways to leverage privileged status to help heal the racial divide.
Mr. Matthews commented that he was speaking on behalf of Faith Voices, which was a network of faith communities throughout the State, and was in support of the efforts of Race Matters. He believed white people, like him, had the opportunity to change the course of racism in the community. He explained it was easy for those raised to see themselves as white people to think this did not impact their lives because they were not behaving in an overtly bigoted way. He stated he did not believe, as white people, they could experience their full humanity if they continued to avoid facing their history and continued to pretend a social system that worked well for a few of them would not hurt them. He commented that the notion of race had been created by his ancestors in the early days of the United States to keep the Irish from thinking they had an equal stake in the country. The key mark of white privilege was the extent to which a person believed racism did not touch them. Those that assumed incarceration rates, predatory lending, racial profiling, the distant expressions of racism throughout the world, and hunger statistics were not the primary threat to the white person or family were enjoying the temporary bubble of white privilege. He noted it would be painful when that bubble busted, but it had already occurred demographically as white people were the minority in global terms. He commented that those that popped the bubble of the myth themselves could liberate themselves and be exposed to a grand vista of possibilities, in terms of human connections and mental and emotional health. He thought they had seen an example of this at the recent Homecoming Parade when a group of courageous black students took their message to the streets by blocking the vehicle of the University of Missouri President, Tim Wolfe, and holding an education rally after attempting to reach Mr. Wolfe through every respectable channel. After a while, a group of white people decided to use their white privilege to get between the student and the vehicle to protect Mr. Wolfe, and later other white people decided to stand with the black students causing the initial group of white people to disappear so they did not appear to be standing with the black students. He stated white privilege was dependent upon how white people acted around one another. He suggested white people talk about racial issues on their own prior to a person of color entering a room or joining an organization. He also suggested they start changing their language by saying phrases similar to "my white friend" or "my white plumber" as that would
3

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
help to show the edges of privilege and change the community in many ways. He commented that the myth of whiteness was a myth, and asked his fellow white people to help lead citizens into a new community by not trading their humanity for trinkets of security.
Grace Vega ­ Task Force on Community Violence recommendations ­ community policing.
Ms. Vega, 3008 Middlebush Drive, explained she had resided in Columbia since 2002, and thanked Mr. Thomas, the Ward 4 Council Member, for his recent extreme responsiveness to Race Matters and the need to dismantle systemic racism in Columbia and its institutions. She commented that she had long been aware of racial inequities and disparities in health care and education, and noted she felt she had made considerable contributions to leveling the playing field in the healthcare systems in Columbia through her work of coordinating interpreting translation services for over 90 different languages. It, however, had taken the recent and far too numerous violent confrontations between police and people of color to move her to a more active role in helping to dismantle racism as its manifest in the arena of criminal justice and public safety. She had discovered Columbia was ahead of the game as the Council had already commissioned the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, who had created a remarkably complete list of recommendations to improve processes, procedures, and outcomes in this regard. One recommendation was to implement community policing and positive communication between police and residents, and this recommendation appeared to resonate with people in various levels of government. Her concern was that "community policing" was currently only a buzz word because there seemed to be a lack of common understanding and definition for community policing amongst leaders and community members. Definitions had ranged from the presence of two officers in Douglass Park with possible expansion in other neighborhoods to the assignment of patrol sergeants and officers to specific beats within their sector where they focused on building relationships with citizens and businesses in efforts to solve problems. She understood community policing efforts had begun and had lasted for a couple of years in the late 1990's, and that those efforts had been abandoned due to the lack of Council support. She asked if there was agreement amongst all of the leadership within the City as to what community policing was, how it needed to be implemented, how training would funded, and how hiring practices would change. She stated the Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) program of the Department of Justice (DOJ) had listed three components to community policing, and those were community partnerships, organizational transformation, and problem solving. She noted she was happy the Police Department had applied for and had received Procedural Justice Training in August as it was a good start toward the organizational transformation piece of community policing, and wondered what steps were being taken to create community partnerships, as she felt that was the bedrock of the model and the basis for the identification of problems and solutions that were discovered. She explained she hoped to be provided answers in upcoming meetings.
Ms. Nauser pointed out the Police Department was planning to host an event on Friday, October 23, 2015 at 7:00 p.m. in City Hall. Ms. Vega stated she had that on her calendar.
4

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Dick Parker ­ Clean Power Plan.
Mr. Parker, 215 W. Sexton Road, provided a handout and explained the Clean Power Plan regulations had been released by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in August and it had called for a 37 percent reduction in the tons of carbon dioxide emissions in Missouri by 2030. The 37 percent was based upon the quantity of carbon dioxide emitted from electric generators in 2012. He noted it was currently unknown how that reduction would be distributed, but he thought Columbia could use 37 percent as an approximation of what would need to be achieved. He believed this would need to be accomplished with renewable energy and a reduction in demand through energy efficiency, and noted Columbia had been a leader in these aspects in Missouri. He commented that carbon dioxide production in Columbia was essentially equivalent to the use of non-renewable energy, and a 37 percent reduction would be difficult to achieve. In fact, a 53 percent increase in demand for services provided by electricity had been projected over this period. There would be an increase of non-renewable energy and carbon dioxide of 16 percent even with the 30 percent renewable energy goal. He stated the projected demand would result in the City producing 84 percent more carbon dioxide than the projected goal of a 37 percent reduction. He reiterated the two ways to achieve the goal were more renewable energy and less demand for electricity, and they would need to use both approaches. Energy efficiency was less expensive than energy from renewable energy or non-renewable energy. He suggested they embrace as much reduction in demand through energy efficiency as possible over the next 15 years, so they did not have to generate the extra energy from renewable sources. The least costly way to achieve energy efficiency was by building it into new buildings, but construction over the next 15 years would not achieve the goal, and the majority of the reduction in demand would have to come from energy efficiency in existing buildings. Some technological changes, such as LED lights, would help, but those technological changes alone would not achieve the goal. He noted savings from energy efficiency made money saved on utility bills available to citizens to spend in Columbia and the costs of creating energy efficiency went to businesses working in Columbia, and both were economic development. He thought they needed to think of this in those terms. He asked the Council to support the International Building Codes for energy efficient residential and commercial buildings. He understood the Council had supported this for residential buildings in the recent past, and noted commercial buildings used the same quantity of electricity as residential buildings. He recommended the Council support both the residential and commercial energy efficiency chapters of the International Building Codes as written. He pointed out they would need to make substantial progress by the first intermediate goal in 2022.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) Construction and installation of concrete pads and bus shelters at various locations throughout the city.
Item A was read by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report.
5

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Mayor McDavid understood the staff report had indicated the estimated cost of each shelter was $11,000, but the total project cost was $569,000 for 18 shelters, and asked for clarification. Mr. Brooks replied the shelter alone was $11,000 each. They were estimating about $20,000 per location as they would need to add sidewalks and other features in some areas to allow for better access. The entire $560,000 amount would be the total project cost, and these were the 18 high priority locations. Mayor McDavid understood more locations would be considered, and the $569,000 would be spent. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct.
Mayor McDavid stated this appeared to be permanent construction and asked if staff was confident in the site selections. Mr. Brooks replied staff anticipated these 18 locations would be utilized based on ridership reports and past data from old routes as they were in high traffic areas. They anticipated these would be locations on routes even with changes in the future.
Mr. Skala agreed bus shelters were essential, but thought they should try to minimize the cost of the bus shelters as much as possible. He asked for the cost of the bus shelters currently in place. Mr. Brooks replied they were within $8,000 and $10,000 depending on whether they included light fixtures and other amenities.
Mr. Skala understood the goal was to get as many bus shelters as possible on routes that were the most dependable, but wondered if they should move to secondary routes if there were issues with regard to purchasing rights-of-way. He noted there were not many routes in the Third Ward and felt something needed to be placed in the corridor between the downtown and Battle High School. He asked about secondary plans if the priority locations did not work out. Mr. Brooks explained they had identified 34 locations, and these were the first 18 based upon connection points and ridership reports. He stated there were some in the Third Ward.
Mr. Thomas stated there had been discussion in the past about encouraging sponsors or businesses close to the locations to advertise on part of the bus shelter to help with costs, and asked where those discussions stood. Mr. Brooks replied advertising on the bus shelters would require ordinance changes, and they had not planned to move forward with changes at this time. He pointed out they had planned to add art components to the shelters to prevent graffiti. He noted advertising could be looked into further if it was desired by the Council. Mr. Thomas asked if he had any sense of the amount of money the City could receive from advertisements on bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied no. Mr. Nichols explained the first step was to obtain permission to move forward with the shelters.
Mr. Trapp understood a shelter already existed at the Library and asked why it was being removed and replaced. Mr. Brooks replied they would place a shelter on the opposite side of the street, and preferred for the two shelters to match and have the same type of design elements. The existing shelter would be moved to another location, and would not be discarded.
Mr. Ruffin commended staff for identifying the First Ward for many of the shelter location as he believed it moved the City closer in its agenda of social equity. He asked at what point in the process staff would entertain recommendations for alternative sites. Mr. Brooks replied at any time in the process. Mr. Ruffin stated he had been contacted by the Montessori School on the corner of Providence Road and Sexton Road with regard to
6

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
pedestrians taking refuge under their canopy, and asked staff to try to accommodate that particular location with a bench or shelter. Mr. Brooks replied he would look into that location.
Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Cheryl Price, 511 Parkade Boulevard, stated she was the current Chair of the Public Transit Advisory Commission and had also served on the Disabilities Commission for over six years. She commented that she had first thought of transportation from the viewpoint of disabled people, but now understood public transportation needed to be available for all citizens in the community as good public transportation would lead to a quality community and could improve the economy. She also understood safe and comfortable shelters were an integral part of the public transit system. The shelters would be in panels that could be dismantled for relocation or an exchange if a panel was damaged, which would save money in the long run. She thought it was important to continue working on the public transit system, and asked the Council for its assistance by appropriating money for bus shelters. Brook Jacobs, 12 E. Ridgely Road, stated he was a member of the Library Board and noted the Library Board had met on October 15 because they understood a new bus stop would be placed in front of the Library. He explained the Board felt the current bus stop was adequate as it was covered and located in a well-lighted area, but if it were to be replaced, the Board wanted to be consulted with regard to the associated artwork and lighting to ensure it was in concert with what was already at the Library. He pointed out the Board also preferred to enter into a memorandum of understanding instead of granting an easement for this purpose. He understood that might save the City some money. He noted 1,700 people utilized the Library every day, and the Board was thankful for the bus stop as a fair amount of the people used public transportation. Ed Baker explained he represented the Holiday Inn Executive Center, and stated he had concerns regarding a proposed bus shelter at Knipp Street and Bernadette Drive as he did not feel it was a safe place to cross, especially when they had thousands of people leaving after a convention. He suggested it be moved further down to the next crosswalk or be re-routed to the side adjacent to the Columbia Mall as riders were likely headed there. He noted his preference was for it to be moved adjacent to the Mall. Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, commented that she was elated there would be bus shelters as she did not like seeing people standing on the side of road or waiting in the weeds or out in the sun. She hoped some shelters would be placed along Providence Road in the future as well. Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, asked about the mobility of the bus shelters. Mr. Brooks replied the shelters and benches could be moved easily, but the concrete was more permanent and would have to be broken out. Mr. Shanker asked if the shelters would come pre-built. Mr. Brooks replied no, and explained they would come in panels for assembly in whatever formation the City chose. Dennis Thompson stated he resided on Blue Grouse Drive and understood the City wanted to place a shelter on Blue Ridge Road, between Providence Road and Range Line Street, which would require an 8 foot by 16 foot portion of his property. He commented that he did not have an issue with helping out the City, but was concerned about a shelter in his back yard only 40 feet from his house. He noted there was a ditch in the area, and wondered
7

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
if that would create issues or if he would be responsible for maintaining the ditch in terms of trash, etc. He was also concerned about people tearing up his property, which would decrease his property value.
Brad Eiffert, 1000 Hulen Drive, stated he owned Boone County Lumber and the adjacent parcels at Range Line Street and Rogers Street, and the bus stop was currently his neighbor's front porch when there was inclement weather. On nicer days, transit riders would wait on a big stone in the landscaped area of his property. He noted he was supportive of a bus shelter at this location as long as there was not a legal encumbrance, such as an easement, the sale or renting of the property, etc. He also wanted to ensure the shelter would be moved if the bus route changed or if he requested it to be moved due to future development or the realignment of streets. He reiterated he would be delighted to support public transportation if that type of flexibility existed. He also asked for a trash can and cigarette butt can to be provided at the shelter in hopes of lessening the amount of trash on his property. He explained the idea of sponsorship had not been discussed with him, but noted he would be happy to consider something in keeping with an adjacent forest product company.
Dan Cullimore, 715 Lyon Street, explained he was the President of the North Central Columbia Neighborhood Association (NCCNA) and noted the NCCNA was the beneficiary of a grant the Public Health and Human Services Department had received to promote active living and healthy lifestyles. He pointed out this benefit included funding for bus shelters at a couple locations. He stated he was happy to bring the full support of the NCCNA to encourage bus shelters as he believed it was important in gaining ridership.
Alyce Turner, 1204 Fieldcrest, stated she was on the Public Transit Advisory Commission and asked why the buses could not travel closer to the Columbia Mall, and suggested the Council address this with management at the Mall. She thought it would be an ideal and much safer stop.
John Clark, 403 N. Ninth Street, understood bus shelters on Providence Road was a traffic flow issue as it would be difficult to pull buses over on narrow four lane streets, and a solution was to utilize Fifth Street. He did not feel that solved the problem for the Montessori School on Providence Road in terms of crosswalks, etc. He suggested the funding for the transit system and sidewalks be connected as they were heavily interrelated. He understood some citizens were concerned about trash at the bus shelters, and thought the City needed to build clean-up, policing, and other costs into the system. He commented that he did not feel locations should be chosen based upon resources as there needed to be a better balance between burdens and benefits. He hoped this balance would be much more openly addressed and that locations would not be chosen solely due to costs for the overall support of the transit system.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mr. Thomas stated he appreciated the efforts of City staff in communicating with individual property owners to find workable solutions, and felt some of the concerns of bus stops in front of private property would go away as public transportation became more accepted and there was more ridership. Mr. Thomas understood each location would have a
8

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
trash can. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. He pointed out a service worker had been added to the budget to help with the maintenance of the shelters in anticipation of this.
Mr. Thomas asked if staff planned to talk to the Library about the design of the shelter by it. Mr. Brooks replied yes. He noted they planned to talk to interested parties for each location with regard to the art components.
Mr. Thomas commented that he was not sure how to address the issue for the Holiday Inn as he felt shelters were needed on both sides of the road, and suspected many people that worked at the Holiday Inn used public transportation to get there. He thought a crosswalk across Bernadette Drive was needed so people did not have to go to Stadium Boulevard to cross.
Mr. Thomas stated he thought these bus shelters were a great step forward as this was a social equity issue. People traveling in vehicles had a more safety and comfort in getting around than those utilizing the bus. He believed this would make a big difference to the experience of bus riders and was important in terms of growing ridership. He commented that he was in Gainesville, Florida last week, and Gainesville had very well-developed bus system, which solved many kinds of problems. He stated he was happy to support this project. He was also happy to know they had reached an agreement with a consultant to assist with a long-range planning process to improve the system.
Mr. Skala agreed the bus shelters were sorely needed throughout the community, but could not believe each shelter would cost $11,000. He thought they could install more shelters if the cut the in half, and preferred functionality over aesthetics at this time as he did not believe the average bus shelters were unattractive. He wanted them to get the most out of the money they had. He thought memorandums of understanding might be better than obtaining easements in terms of overall costs and the portability of the shelters. He believed the bus shelter project was long overdue, and asked staff to attempt to install as many shelters as possible.
Mayor McDavid commented that most of this money was coming from a Federal Transit Administration (FTA) grant, and he did not believe they could assume they would receive more funding in the future. He hoped the Public Transit Advisory Commission (PTAC) followed the use of this money closely and that there would be 50 shelters in the community in ten years as he felt there was enough money.
Ms. Nauser understood the cost would be $100 per bus shelter for maintenance, repair, and cleaning and asked if staff would clean up around the facility in addition to taking care of the trash in the trash cans. Mr. Brooks replied yes.
Ms. Nauser stated she had advocated for bus shelters in the past as she did not feel it was right for public transportation users to have to stand outside in inclement weather, and hoped the shelters would be installed quickly. She agreed this would improve the City's bus system, and hoped it would result in a higher ridership. She also hoped staff would investigate investment from the private sector in terms of advertising on bus shelters as the transit system would benefit from more money for more shelters and routes.
Mr. Nichols pointed out $500,000 had been included for shelters as part of the capital improvement sales tax ballot issue, which had passed, and that funding was in addition to the funding for this project so more shelters could be installed in the future.
9

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Ms. Peters asked how many bus shelters the City presently had. Mr. Brooks replied the City had 26 shelters, and about seven of them were at locations that were not currently serviced. Staff planned to move those while they were waiting on the new shelters to be delivered. Ms. Peters understood there would be 44 bus shelters once this project was complete. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Ms. Peters asked how many shelters they wanted to have throughout the City. Mr. Brooks replied some people wanted a shelter at every stop, but that was obviously not feasible. He explained there were 34 connection points so the goal was to have one at every connection point. Ms. Peters asked if the 18 shelters they were discussing now would all be at connection points. Mr. Brooks replied he thought all but two would be at connection points.
Ms. Peters asked if staff had communicated with the Columbia Mall regarding a bus stop there. Mr. Brook replied the City had gone onto Mall property about ten years ago, but had been asked to not go onto the property any longer because the structure of the parking lot was not built for the constant passage of very heavy buses. Ms. Peters asked if that was still true. Mr. Brooks replied he did not know. Ms. Peters asked if staff could check. Mr. Brooks replied yes, and pointed out City staff preferred not to go onto private property, especially during high traffic times, as that would slow the routes down significantly.
Mr. Trapp noticed the bench had been removed from an old bus stop on the north side of Leslie Lane in front of McKnight Plaza, and asked if that was standard practice. Mr. Brooks replied he would need to check and get back to Mr. Trapp.
Mr. Trapp asked if City staff could look at alternatives to the shelter on Blue Ridge Road that would impact the property of Mr. Thompson. He understood there was a need for a shelter in the area due to ridership numbers, but wondered if there were options of other locations. He stated he was glad to know maintenance had been increased, and noted he had found bus stops to be fairly well maintained in general. He commented that he missed having the trash can at the stop on Leslie Lane as it served more people than transit riders, and suggested they look at street trash cans and whether those cost could be folded into the overall solid waste costs. One of the greatest complaints he tended to receive involved litter, and it was difficult to deal with litter in terms of enforcement. He noted the City had various departments picking up trash, and wondered if they could have solid waste pick up all of the City's trash and if they could combine systems to incorporate a street trash can system as well.
Mr. Trapp also wondered if they needed to change an already well-functioning and popular bus stop at the Library only so the design matched the one across the street. He stated he could live with it if they were only swapping it out, but did not feel they needed to acquire an easement for it. Mr. Brooks stated he did not believe it would involve an easement. They were only swapping it out. The existing shelter would then be used elsewhere. Mr. Trapp understood there would not be a new pad. Mr. Brooks stated that was correct. Mr. Trapp was agreeable to the shelters matching if all else was equal and the existing shelter would be used elsewhere.
Mr. Skala suggested benches at some locations as that would not require the $11,000 outlay per shelter. It would also allow for the pad to be there for a shelter to be placed in those locations in the future if there was funding. He asked if that was a possibility. Mr.
10

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Brooks replied the City had a few benches in storage so it would only be a matter of pouring concrete to install the benches. He pointed out this grant was specifically for bus shelters.
Mr. Skala made a motion directing staff to proceed with plans and specifications for the project. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
OLD BUSINESS
B287-15 Authorizing a waterline replacement contract with Consolidated Public Water Supply District No. 1 of Boone County, Missouri relating to the relocation of a portion of Rangeline Road as part of the Runway 13/31 extension project at Columbia Regional Airport.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Nichols provided a staff report. Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend B287-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. B287-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
B291-15 Accepting donated funds and twenty-five (25) LED exterior wall sconces from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Water and Light Department for street light improvements in the downtown area; appropriating funds.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Johnsen and Mr. Williams provided a staff report. Ms. Peters asked if this type of lighting already existed in locations downtown. Mr. Williams replied the Downtown Community Improvement District (CID) had installed some of the wall sconces in the north-south alley between Harpo's and the Pizza Tree. Mr. Skala asked if there had been input from the Police Department in terms of crime prevention through environmental design. Mr. Williams replied the Police Department had requested additional and improved lighting in the alleyways and this particular project would replace existing street lighting that was not functional for the most part at this time. Katie Essing, 11 S. Tenth Street, stated she was representing the Downtown CID, and noted the police had walked with them overnight last spring. She believed this was an important project in terms of increasing the safety and security of guests and the employees of the businesses that used the alleys. The location of the sconces at the Eighth Street and Cherry Street garage would be helpful for those using the alley behind the area as it was one of the heaviest used trash and recycling locations. She thought this would help in terms of overall safety and eliminate potential crimes and quality of life issues. B291-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
11

CONSENT AGENDA

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting

The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B281-15 B282-15 B283-15 B284-15 B285-15 B286-15 B288-15 B289-15 B290-15 B292-15 B293-15
B294-15 R164-15 R165-15 R166-15

Approving a major amendment to the Boone Hospital South Campus C-P Plan located on the southeast corner of Forum Boulevard and Nifong Boulevard.
Rezoning property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road from District C-1 to District O-P; approving the statement of intent.
Approving the O-P Plan of River Region Credit Union ­ West Broadway for property located on the southwest corner of Broadway and Fairview Road.
Appropriating funds for repairs to the art exhibit at the Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial at Battle Garden.
Authorizing construction of sanitary sewers in Sewer District No. 170 (Bethel Church Road/Poplar Hill Drive); calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of easements for construction of the Flat Branch Watershed Relief Sewer Project No. 3.
Authorizing grant agreements with the Mid-Missouri Solid Waste Management District for the purchase of front-loading recycling containers and apartment recycling drop off bins; appropriating funds.
Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to industrial pretreatment requirements for the Columbia Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility.
Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to relocate a taxi stand on Tenth Street.
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.
Authorizing an agreement with The Curators of the University of Missouri, on behalf of its Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital, relating to emergency veterinary services for injured animals retrieved by animal control officers.
Accepting a donation from the Downtown Community Improvement District to be used by the Office of Sustainability for the Steps to Sustainability recognition program; appropriating funds.
Setting a public hearing: replacing existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting.
Transferring funds to the Youth Advisory Commission to allow for two members to attend the National League of Cities Conference ­ Youth Delegate Program.
Authorizing an agreement with the Stuart Parker Housing Development Group, LP, formerly the Housing Authority of the City of Columbia, for FY 2015 HOME funds for the renovation of housing units located at 207, 209 and 211 Hicks Drive; authorizing an amendment to a HOME agreement with the Housing Authority of the City of Columbia for the renovation of housing units located at 214A, 214B, 216A and 216B Unity Drive.

12

R167-15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Authorizing FY 2015 Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) funding agreements with Independent Living Center of Mid-Missouri, Inc., d/b/a Services for Independent Living, and Job Point.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS, NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS None.
INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all
were given first reading.

B295-15 B296-15
B297-15 B298-15 B299-15 B300-15 B302-15 B303-15 B304-15
B305-15

Amending Chapter 20 of the City Code as it relates to the schedule of fees for processing rezoning applications from any district to district R-1.
Approving the Final Plat of Barcus Ridge, Plat No. 2 located on the north side of Old Plank Road and southwest of the intersection of Route K and Old Plank Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations as it relates to direct driveway access on Old Plank Road subject to conditions.
Approving the Final Plat of Creeks Edge, Plat No. 3 located along Sawgrass Drive, west of Scott Boulevard; authorizing a performance contract.
Vacating sewer and electric easements located on the northeast corner of Broadway and William Street (1601, 1605, 1701 and 1705 Broadway); accepting conveyances for sewer purposes.
Authorizing the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.
Authorizing the acquisition of an easement for the construction of improvements at the intersection of Stadium Boulevard and Old Route 63.
Authorizing a right of use permit with The Board of Trustees of Boone County Hospital to allow for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private irrigation system built in a portion of the Nifong Boulevard and Forum Boulevard rights-of-way.
Appropriating funds for the Transit Service Analysis and Planning Assistance project.
Authorizing an Intergovernmental Cooperative Agreement Partial Performance Acknowledgement of Hinkson Creek Physical Habitat Assessment with the County of Boone and The Curators of the University of Missouri as it relates to the collaborative adaptive management implementation (CAM) process to address the total maximum daily load (TMDL) for Hinkson Creek.
Vacating a portion of a water utility easement adjacent to Lot 2 and Lot 3 within Horse Fair Subdivision located on the north side of Oakland Gravel Road.

13

B306-15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Accepting conveyances for utility purposes.

B307-15

Authorizing the replacement of existing light fixtures in the natatorium, gymnasium, hallway, maintenance room and exterior areas of the Activity and Recreation Center (ARC) with energy efficient LED lighting; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division.

B308-15

Authorizing a cooperative agreement with the Greenbelt Land Trust of Mid-Missouri for the FY 2016 implementation phase of the "Our Natural Legacy: A Plan for Columbia and Boone County" open space/green infrastructure project.

B309-15

Authorizing an agreement with Green Valley Rifle & Pistol Club, Inc. for range facility access and use by the Columbia Police Department for official scheduled training.

B310-15

Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for the Youth Leadership in Tobacco Prevention program; appropriating funds.

B311-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 1 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for HIV prevention; appropriating funds.

B312-15

Authorizing Amendment No. 2 to the program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Healthy Eating Active Living in Local Communities program; appropriating funds.

B313-15

Amending Chapter 22 to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159 relating to residential refuse collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential refuse collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential roll cart refuse pick-up; to repeal and re-enact in place thereof a new Section 22-159.1 relating to residential recycling collection, to prohibit roll carts for residential recycling collection and prohibit the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential recycling roll cart pick-up.

B315-15

Calling a special election to consider an initiative ordinance requiring the existing residential refuse and recycling collector and rate systems be maintained, prohibiting roll carts for residential refuse and recycling collection, and prohibiting the purchase or modification of refuse collection vehicles designed for automated residential refuse and recycling roll cart pick-up.

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

REP101-15 Amendment to Section 29-130 (Parking) of the City Code as it Pertains to Fraternity and Sorority Houses.

Mr. Thomas asked if the fraternities and sororities were also looking for relief in the amount of parking they were required to provide or whether there was an alternative way to achieve the goal. Mr. Teddy replied he thought this was an alternative. He noted there had been a history of the Greek houses going to the Board of Adjustment for parking reductions. He stated he could produce that data for the benefit of the Planning and Zoning Commission meeting. He thought this particular applicant was acknowledging the requirements of the ordinance and only wanted the ability to meet the requirement off-site within a 500 foot radius. Mr. Thomas asked how much parking was required per the current ordinances. Mr. Teddy replied it was one-half the rated occupancy. Mr. Thomas understood that meant one space per every two beds. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct.
14

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Mr. Thomas made a motion to refer this issue along with the minimum parking issue to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
REP102-15 Certification of Initiative Petition ­ Prohibition of Residential Refuse and Recycling Roll Carts and Automated Refuse Collection.
Ms. Thompson explained two bills associated with the issue were introduced on tonight's agenda, and the next step would be for Council to consider those items. One bill would pass the initiative ordinance in the form in which it was presented, and the other bill would send the issue to the voters for approval or rejection. She pointed out the Council had removed B314-15, which had been in the packet, from the agenda and had introduced B31515, which was a new bill. The new bill clarified the petitioners were seeking a repeal and reenactment of the current provisions related to residential recycling and solid waste pick-up in addition to new amendments related to the prohibition of roll carts and automated collection vehicles for roll carts. She noted the next available election date for municipal purposes was March 15, 2016, which was the presidential preference primary election date.
Mayor McDavid understood this would be the date of the election even if the petitioners preferred the April, 2016 election due to the Charter language. Ms. Thompson stated that was correct, and noted this was specified in Section 132 of the City Charter.
Mr. Skala understood the Council would have two potential issues to consider, and asked if it was an either or situation. He wondered if they had to vote on both and whether one was contingent upon the other. Ms. Thompson replied if the Council chose not to adopt the language put forth in the petition, it was mandatory for them to submit the issue to the voters. Mr. Skala understood they had to weigh in on both issues. He asked if they could just send it to the voters without voting on the issue. Ms. Thompson replied no, and explained they would have to choose whether or not to adopt the language. If they chose not to adopt it, the effect was sending it to the voters. It mandated the vote to send it to the voters. She noted the item they were really considering was whether to adopt the ordinance in its current form as submitted.
REP103-15 Task Force on Community Violence Recommendation Status Update.
Ms. Nauser commented that she thought the community could be proud of this process, and noted it was important for the citizenry to ensure follow through from their government. She did not want the recommendations of the Task Force to sit on a shelf, and explained this report was a snapshot of where the community was today on some of the initiatives and recommendations. The report showed more needed to be done as many items were in their beginning stages. She pointed out the Task Force did not intend for everything to be solved by the City government as other agencies needed to be involved. She stated this needed to be a community effort, and encouraged the public to read the report and communicate with Council in that regard. She noted a community meeting would be held on October 28 to facilitate more dialogue, and invited the public to attend.
Mr. Trapp stated a lot of work had been put into this by a broad swath of the community and noted he was proud of the Task Force recommendations and report. It was
15

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
based upon the consensus from a diverse group of stakeholders over a long period of time. He explained some of the goals were very specific and actionable, while others were intentionally very broad. Ending violence was something the City government was incapable of doing on its own. It would take everyone in the community to assist in addressing these issues. He commented that they had made some good steady progress, but still had more to do. He noted he had participated in the Chamber Leadership trip to Gainesville, Florida, and in many areas Columbia was holding its own or was superior to Gainesville, but Gainesville was leaps and bounds ahead of Columbia in terms of law enforcement and community policing. They had been proactively building relationships for a long time, and were actually attempting to address the disproportionate minority contact. He thought Columbia could look to them in terms of law enforcement. He noted Gainesville had been able to do this with existing resources, but their existing resources were about twice as much as Columbia's resources. He commented that he appreciated the Race Matters group for bringing forth these issues and for their support of the Task Force recommendations. In terms of community policing, he thought an attitudinal shift was underway, but in order to be proactive in relationship building, the police officers could not continue to go from call to call. He thought they as a community needed to find resources to have the kind of law enforcement they deserved. He pointed out the work on the Task Force was a nice preview to the Strategic Plan as its focus was broadened to social equity and racial justice beyond law enforcement. He hoped the public would attend the event on October 28 and asked staff to notify the former Task Force members of the meeting via e-mail as well. He noted they would discuss how the community wanted to be involved in the ongoing implementation and accountability efforts.
Mr. Thomas commented that he appreciated the work of community groups in pushing for the implementation of the Task Force recommendations as it was important to follow through with those actions in a transparent manner. He hoped this information would be placed on the website similar to that of the Comprehensive Plan recommendations so the public could see the status on a regular basis. He stated he thought community policing was important, and agreed Gainesville had a proactive approach to reducing crime. He noted one program in Gainesville involved a monthly event where youth in different neighborhoods were invited to have dinner and spend an evening talking to an officer on various discussion topics. The people that had presented the information had been extremely passionate and excited about the benefits of this approach. He commented that clear instructions had been given to officers to avoid arrests in situations where it might not be warranted even if it was an eligible response for the officers. They were to look at alternative ways to de-escalate a situation to keep juveniles, in particular, out of the criminal justice system. He stated he was happy the Task Force recommendations had a high profile, and noted the meeting on October 28 would allow them to create time lines for some of the actions.
Mr. Skala stated he was appreciative of all of the work that had gone into this, and agreed with Mr. Thomas in the creation of a dashboard in terms of progress. He commented that he was glad some of them had gone to Gainesville and had gathered some information on this topic because he had wanted to share information he had brought back from Orlando, Florida. He noted he had been invited to participate in the National League of Cities Racial
16

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Equality and Leadership group, and it dovetailed nicely into this. He suggested time be provided for the Council to inform each other and discuss issues in terms of community policing and the misunderstanding people had about community policing within the community and the Police Department.
Ms. Nauser suggested the final report of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence be placed on the same webpage as the dashboard associated with the recommendations as it was currently difficult to find that information. She also thought this should be made prominent on the website.
REP104-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, commented that the petitioners were not in agreement as to which election was preferred, but noted they all agreed they wanted it to be placed on the ballot for the election in which the costs were the least. He also asked for clarification with regard to the next actions of the Council. Ms. Thompson explained the Council would consider two bills at their next meeting. One bill would enact the ordinance as presented and the other would submit the issue to the voters. If Council decided to not enact the ordinance as presented, it would go to the vote of the people. Mr. Shanker stated he thought the language still needed to be agreed upon. Ms. Thompson replied no, and explained the ballot language was included in the bill that would send the issue to the voters. She pointed out the City Charter called for the issue to go to the next available election for municipal election purposes, so they did not have a choice in that regard.
Mr. Ruffin explained the Columbia Alliance to Combat Homelessness (CATCH) was a community-based group that had grown out of the Room at the Inn initiative and had the vision of building a comprehensive, year-round shelter for the homeless. He noted this group had been in partnership with the City to build a facility on Eighth Street. He stated they had met with the North Central Columbia Neighborhood Association (NCCNA) and the Ridgeway Neighborhood Association on October 6, and the residents were in favor of the vision to build a comprehensive homeless shelter. The residents, however, did not feel it should be built in a residential neighborhood, and, in particular, in their residential neighborhood. They were concerned about public safety and other impacts which they already dealt with in their neighborhoods due to the services for the homeless presently located there. He commented that CATCH had met with the residents a second time to clarify concerns, and he believed the concerns of the residents were legitimate. In this process, they had discovered the proposed property was likely too small to build a facility to meet all of the needs that were appropriate for a center of this nature. As a result, CATCH had decided to maintain their commitment to building a facility, but to pull back from building it at that location. In addition, the tentative plans for the facility were on hold until further notice.
Mr. Ruffin commented the Columbia Housing Authority and the Central Missouri Opportunity Council, which was a newly formed organization consisting of citizens that were
17

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
focused on the development of minority and women owned companies in order to create more opportunities in terms of contractual work and new jobs, would hold a kick-off meeting on Monday, October 26 at Oak Towers at 5:00 p.m. The focus would be on networking in terms of discussing the issues and expanding opportunities.
Mayor McDavid asked if Regional Economic Development Inc. (REDI) had been invited. Mr. Ruffin replied yes. Mayor McDavid noted REDI had discussed similar initiatives in the recent past so he hoped they would attend.
Ms. Nauser stated she had been contacted by a couple of people who worked in the downtown area with regard to skateboarders that did not abide by any pedestrian or vehicular traffic rules and were darting out into the street on their skateboards from alleys, etc. She wondered if the downtown units could keep an eye out for this dangerous behavior.
Ms. Nauser commented that the adopt-a-spot at the roundabout on State Farm Parkway included very tall decorative grass, which made it difficult to see someone crossing at that roundabout that was small in stature from a few cars back. She was concerned about the safety of children and other people, and asked staff to look into this issue to ensure it did not inhibit motorists from seeing pedestrians walking through the crosswalk.
Mr. Thomas thanked Mr. Parker for his analysis on how the Council could meet the goals of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) through a combination of energy efficiency and renewable energy. He also thanked the other three individuals that had spoken on the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence and the racial divide in Columbia. He was happy this conversation was continuing to happen and that the University of Missouri administration was responding to some of the calls on campus with regard to this issue. He stated he was not sure anyone knew all of the right paths, but noted he was glad they were having an open dialogue.
Mr. Thomas passed around a copy of the Gainesville bus time table and noted it was dependent on student fees of $9 per credit hour, which was higher than the nearby communities they had previously visited. There were 70,000 students in Gainesville, and all paid about $200-$220 per year for free bus travel throughout the community. In addition, about 33,000 employees also had free bus passes through a program the transit system had with any employer that wished to purchase bus passes for the entire work force. It was a rate of $7.50 per month times the number of employees the employer had. The system had 11 million rides per year, and their buses were clean and plentiful. The campus routes were very well used. In addition to the campus routes, there were about 30 community routes. He noted the size of the community was not much larger than Columbia. He pointed out Gary Ward from the University of Missouri had been on the trip, so he was able to see the system. He did not believe the University of Missouri understood the benefits this type of transit system would bring to the University as well as the City of Columbia and its residents, but thought they should continue to make the case to reach that goal.
Mr. Skala commented that he had brought back a flash drive from the meeting in Orlando, Florida he had participated in, which contained a presentation by the Mayor of
18

City Council Minutes ­ 10/19/15 Meeting
Orlando with regard to minority contracting for public facilities. He understood it had been a city-county coordinated effort, and stated he would share it with the rest of the Council.
Mr. Skala asked City staff to place speed trailers on Kelsey Drive near its intersection with Lake of the Woods Road to slow down people who were traveling on that road.
Mr. Skala asked City staff to look at whether traffic calming was needed near the intersection of Rice Road and Shamrock Drive, or to restrict parking to only one side of the street. He wanted staff to look at how it could be a safer intersection as it was narrow with a 35 mph speed limit.
The meeting adjourned at 8:59 p.m. Respectfully submitted, Sheela Amin City Clerk
19

