City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
CITY COUNCIL MEETING MINUTES COUNCIL CHAMBER, CITY HALL
701 E. BROADWAY, COLUMBIA, MISSOURI AUGUST 17, 2015
INTRODUCTORY
The City Council of the City of Columbia, Missouri met for a regular meeting at 7:00 p.m. on Monday, August 17, 2015, in the Council Chamber of the City of Columbia, Missouri. The Pledge of Allegiance was recited, and the roll was taken with the following results: Council Members NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA and THOMAS were present. The City Manager, City Counselor, City Clerk, and various Department Heads and staff members were also present.
APPROVAL OF THE MINUTES
The minutes of the regular meeting of August 3, 2015 were approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Skala and a second by Ms. Nauser.
APPROVAL AND ADJUSTMENT OF AGENDA INCLUDING CONSENT AGENDA
Upon her request, Mr. Skala made a motion to allow Ms. Nauser to abstain from voting on R129-15, R130-15, and R131-15 due to a conflict of interest. Ms. Nauser noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that her family business was involved in alcohol sales. The motion was seconded by Mr. Trapp and approved unanimously by voice vote.
Upon his request, Mr. Trapp made a motion to allow Mr. Skala to abstain from voting on the Board of Health general interest in public health vacancy due to a conflict of interest. Mr. Skala noted on the Disclosure of Interest form that his spouse was an applicant. The motion was seconded by Mr. Thomas and approved unanimously by voice vote.
The agenda, including the consent agenda, was approved unanimously by voice vote on a motion by Mr. Trapp and a second by Mr. Thomas.
SPECIAL ITEMS
Convention and Visitors Bureau Accreditation.
Mayor McDavid asked Kim Trabue, Chair of the Convention and Visitors Advisory Board, Amy Schneider, the Director of the Convention and Visitors Bureau, and the Convention and Visitors Bureau team to join him at the podium. He explained the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau had been awarded the Destination Marketing Accreditation Program seal by Destination Marketing Association International (DMAI) in July. DMAI served as the world's largest and most influential resource for destination marketing organizations with over 3,700 members, and the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau had joined over 200 destination marketing organizations to be accredited. The accreditation required 53 mandatory standards in sixteen areas, ranging from governance and financials to communications and destination development, to be met, and an additional 40 voluntary standards could be met. He noted this achievement would not have been possible without the hard work of the Columbia Convention and Visitors Bureau team, and asked those in attendance to join him in congratulating them on this distinguished award.
1

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
APPOINTMENTS TO BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS Upon receiving the majority vote of the Council, the following individuals were
appointed to the following Boards and Commissions. Mr. Skala abstained from voting on the Board of Health general interest in public health vacancy.
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT Hammen, Janet, 1844 Cliff Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire May 1, 2016
BOARD OF ELECTRICAL EXAMINERS Noordsy, Todd, 3 Mumford Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018
BOARD OF HEALTH Skala, Mahree, 5201 Gasconade Drive, Ward 3, Term to expire August 31, 2018 Szewczyk, Michael, 1404 E. Highlands Court, Ward 5, Term to expire August 31, 2018
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION CODES COMMISSION Muzzy, Doug, 2202 Potomac Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018 Noordsy, Todd, 3 Mumford Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire August 1, 2018 Roberts, Christopher, 901 Cutters Corner Lane, Ward 6, Term to expire August 1, 2018
CITY OF COLUMBIA NEW CENTURY FUND, INC. BOARD Nolte, Robert, 113 E. El Cortez Drive, Ward 5, Term to expire September 30, 2017
COLUMBIA VISION COMMISSION Campbell, Chris, 4001 Meadow View Drive, Ward 6, Term to expire December 15, 2016
HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION Tucker, Robert, 4604 Gage Place, Ward 4, Term to expire September 1, 2018 Wahrenbrock, Mark, 2400 Hillshire Drive, Ward 4, Term to expire September 1, 2018
TAX INCREMENT FINANCING COMMISSION Beverley, Andrew, 210 E. Ridgeley Road, Ward 5, Term to expire September 1, 2019
YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL May, Timothy, Ward 4, Term to expire February 15, 2016
SCHEDULED PUBLIC COMMENT Jill Raitt - Roll carts.
Jill Raitt commented that she had lived in Boone County since 1981 and in Columbia since 2001, except from 2008-2013 when she lived in St. Louis, and it was there where she used standard roll carts for garbage and paper, glass, and tin combined recycling. She noted she had both knees and a hip replaced, and had lived with a steep driveway, and the roll carts had been easy to use. She stated they were beautifully balanced in that she could move one with only two fingers, and when full, they were easy to control going down the driveway. When empty, she could pull both up the driveway at the same time. She
2

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
explained she only had to handle refuse and recycled material twice, once in internal receptacles in the house and then into the roll carts. She noted it was not as easy in Columbia because she had to place paper into paper bags or boxes, the tin and plastic into the blue bags, and the garbage in the black bags. She pointed out her garbage was stored in a garbage can outside, which her dog tended to turnover, and her dog had never turned over the garbage in St. Louis because the roll carts included some kind of odor control. She commented that the roll carts were also safer for the refuse collectors because they did not have to handle sharp cans, broken glass, etc., and they were more secure. They were not affected by wind, rain, or snow, whereas paper bags and cardboard boxes could easily disintegrate. She stated she had not seen any overturned carts resulting in spillage in the streets as a result of roll carts, and had seen spillage more regularly with Columbia's current system. She commented that she could not wait for Columbia to move to roll carts, especially with combined recycling. She understood that might be hard to accomplish due to the City's current operations, but believed it was worth it in the end. She noted she did not understand the resistance to roll carts.
Michael Byrne - Solid Waste Utility report.
Michael Byrne stated he had been surprised by Columbia's trash and recycling system when he first moved here, and noted he had been impressed with essentially every other part of City government except for the lack of roll carts. He explained he was from New Zealand where roll carts were called wheelie-bins, and he had always thought they were wonderful. He noted he thought it was odd that he put his white trash bags from the kitchen trash container into a black trash bag and then had to find a place to store it until trash day when he then had to haul it to the street. He pointed out he ended up purchasing his own wheeliebin so he could save energy. He stated he was surprised by the controversy, and noted he had been accused of being a "City plant" by those opposed to roll carts, which he assured the Council he was not. He commented that although he wanted wheelie-bins, he had not thought about the policy reasons for it until he had been educated at the Ward 4 meeting, and believed the policy reasons were really good. He liked that this would be adopted with a payas-you throw system as it would internalize any negative externalities of people that contributed more refuse and would provide incentives in the right place for people to control their trash consumption. It would also cause greater diversion rates to recycling. He noted he had not realized City workers were suffering serious injuries from the current trash collection system, and was concerned they would continue to expose people who wanted to work as garbage collectors to injuries every week if they did not change the system. He thought the Council should consider a change to wheelie-bins on that issue alone. He commented that Columbia could look to three nearby communities, Fulton, Jefferson City, and Ashland, to see how the wheelie-bin system worked, and encouraged the Council to contact the council members of those communities. He asked the Council to support wheelie-bins.
PUBLIC HEARINGS
(A) FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia.
3

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
B220-15 Adopting the FY 2016 Annual Budget for the City of Columbia. B221-15 Amending Chapter 6 of the City Code as it relates to trade permit fees. B222-15 Amending Chapter 12A of the City Code as it relates to stormwater utility charges. B223-15 Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code as it relates to parking fees for unmetered off-street municipal parking lots and facilities and parking meter hoods. B224-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to solid waste rates and services. B225-15 Amending Chapter 22 of the City Code as it relates to sanitary sewer utility connection fees.
Item A was read by the Clerk, and B220-15, B221-15, B222-15, B223-15, B224-15, and B225-15 were given second reading by the Clerk.
Mr. Matthes provided a staff report. Mr. Skala explained Chicago, Illinois had 42 aldermen and each was allocated about $2 million so their constituents could decide how to use those funds, and asked Mr. Matthes for his thoughts. Mr. Matthes replied the City had recently purchased software called SpeakUpCoMo, and he envisioned asking members of the community to voice their opinions as to how future savings should be spent. He thought it could provide Council great input as they made decisions during the next budget year. Mr. Trapp commented that there had been a lot of community conversation for implementing the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and asked if money was in the budget for a violence interrupters program. Mr. Matthes replied the exploration of violence interruption was in the Strategic Plan, and money for it was within the $50,000 categorized as Strategic Plan Implementation. He thought they could explore the program to find the model that worked best in Columbia, and they could then fund it as part of next year's budget or amend this year's budget when they had a particular plan. Ms. Nauser understood the $128,000 that was recommended to go back into the general fund could be reprogrammed if necessary. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct. Ms. Nauser understood the Council could use its discretionary funding as well. Mr. Matthes stated that was correct and explained that amount was $48,000 in the next budget. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. Kevin Schults, 6860 Nelson Drive, explained he was the Chair of the Commission on Cultural Affairs and described the FY 2016 arts funding process. The Commission reviewed proposals for funding from 24 non-profit arts and culture agencies with requests totaling over $196,000. Funding recommendations were calculated based on a cap of $100,000 for the annual funding process with an additional $3,000 for the small requests funding process, which was distributed throughout the year. He commented that arts and culture organizations played a part in strengthening the community in many ways, and funding to those agencies was crucial in enhancing the lives of Columbia citizens and growing the economy. These funds allowed for high quality programming, cultural and educational opportunities to underserved populations, the leveraging of other outside funding, and bringing visitors to the City to create economic development. The funds also played an important role in strengthening the quality of life, consistently making Columbia a more desirable place to live and to do business. They estimated 163,000 people would participate in City funded arts and culture activities in the coming year. He noted the Commission
4

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
commended the Council for recognizing the importance of actively supporting the arts locally, and hoped they would continue the tradition.
Terry Crouch, the Vice Chair of the Community Development Commission, explained Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) proposals totaled $1.2 million while the City only had $839,000 available to allocate and HOME fund proposals totaled $559,000 while the City only had $389,000 available to allocate. He noted the Commission recommended the bulk of the allocation go toward homeownership assistance programs. Funding for bus shelters, Job Point vocational training, and a few other programs were also recommended by the Commission.
Jay Lindner, 1400 Forum Boulevard, provided a handout and explained the commercial trash rates within the City of Columbia were far higher than what the private market charged for similar services. He commented that the City had a monopoly on commercial trash service, but it was unable to provide an efficient service that could compete with the private sector. His company currently paid just under $36,000 annually for commercial trash for four properties, and this was about $9,000 higher than they would pay in the private market. The proposed increase as part of the FY 2016 budget would result in an annual increase of over $8,700, so they would be paying over $44,000 a year in commercial refuse rates. This was $18,000 per year above what would be charged by the private sector. He commented that they could not bid this service to the private sector because of an ordinance that stated it would be unlawful for any person other than an agent of City to haul, convey, or transport any garbage, defined as food waste, from any location within the City. This meant any dumpster containing food waste, which included all of their shopping centers, could only be emptied by the City. He noted attempts to have this ordinance removed had resulted in the comment that it was the only way to ensure adequate service occurred to maintain proper sanitary conditions for public health, which he felt was an excuse since the services of private companies were utilized in other communities. He asked the Council to reject further increases in commercial refuse rates or to lift the ordinance that provided the City with a monopoly so they could bid their trash service to the private market.
Ross Bridges, 5604 Astoria Court, stated he was the President of the Welcome Home Inc. Board of Directors and a United States Marine Corps Combat Veteran, and explained Welcome Home was a transitional housing shelter for homeless veterans. Welcome Home had been in operation since 1992 and had been founded by a group of Vietnam Veterans that had put their own money together to build the current facility. Over the years, a natural partnership had developed between Welcome Home, the Columbia Housing Authority, and the Truman V.A. Hospital as they realized they could not serve enough of the homeless veteran population. The permanent housing portion of this project, known as the Patriot Place Apartments, was completely funded. They now needed to finalize the funding for the transitional housing and supportive services portions of the project, which they would do through a capital campaign, applying for grants, and state income tax credits. He stated they were thankful to be considered for funding as part of the budget deliberations, and asked those in support of the project to stand, and approximately 20 people stood.
Mr. Skala asked how well the fundraising efforts were going. Mr. Bridges replied they had kicked off their capital campaign in December of last year and had raised 63 percent of
5

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
the funding needed to complete the project. He thought they were on pace to raise the remaining funds needed.
Sarah Froese explained she worked at the Truman V.A. Hospital where she oversaw the homeless, vocational, veteran corps, and peer support programs, and thanked the Council for its support of this project. She commented that they had about 5,000 visits from veterans that were homeless or close to being homeless in FY 2013, and the number of visits had increased to 8,000 in FY 2014. In FY 2013, 365 veterans had come in with some type of homeless issue, and in FY 2014 that number had increased to 618. This year, they were already at 700. As a result, programs such as this were desperately needed. She noted there were no male beds at the Salvation Army this weekend, and their other two contract locations were full as well. She reiterated they desperately needed this project to help take care of veterans, and noted money would be saved due to fewer visits to the emergency room and fewer incarcerations. She commented that this partnership would allow them to train veterans to obtain jobs through vocational programs on-site, and would allow those with permanent housing to ultimately leave and become contributing members of society again. She thanked the Council for its consideration in funding this project and for its support.
Phil Steinhaus, 201 Switzler Street, stated he was the CEO of the Columbia Housing Authority and noted he appreciated the City's support of Welcome Home in helping them with the first phase of their shelter. He pointed out they would have the operations in place once the buildings were constructed, which was not always the case. He commented that he was also appreciative of the funding to support Cradle to Career, which would help with the achievement gap, and the HOME funding for their Oak Towers project. He also thanked the Council for its support of the Bryant Walkway and Oak Towers renovation projects as it would renovate many public housing units. He stated he was appreciative of the focus of the Strategic Plan in terms of social equity and investing in less enfranchised aspects of the community as it recognized a lot was lost when they did not help everyone to become successful participating members of the community.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that there had been many fundraising events for the veterans, and he had recently participated in one of those events. He noted help was needed in addition to money, and asked the community to participate in future fundraising events.
There being no further comment, Mayor McDavid continued the public hearing to the September 8, 2015 Council Meeting.
Mayor McDavid congratulated Mr. Matthes for putting together a pretty good budget. He commented that he liked to benchmark where they stood today compared to the past, and believed it was all about the general fund, which funded public safety. He did not feel many people understood they could not use sewer funds to hire firefighters. He was happy they were able to fund four additional firefighters and three additional police officers through this budget. He noted the projected general fund increase for next year was 0.4 percent, and this concerned him because that percentage needed to match the population increase of two percent plus the inflation of two percent. Since 2005, the general fund was down $10 million when taking population and inflation increases into account. This was the reason they were short 22 police officers and 15 firefighters. Although he was happy they were able to fund an
6

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
increase in public safety officers, he noted Columbia would have substantial challenges in terms of dealing with this in the future. He applauded Mr. Matthes for the savings due to incentive based budgeting, and was happy they were paying more attention to public pensions, which he felt was the single largest fiscal threat to state and local governments over the next generation. He commented that he disagreed with the increase in sewer connection fees as Columbia already had the highest sewer connection fees in the State of Missouri.
Mr. Thomas stated his appreciation to Mr. Matthes for his focus on social equity as Columbia had two distinct populations with large gaps in between them in terms of achievement, income and wealth, public safety, quality of life, health, etc. He commented that the allocation of the cost of growth was a part of the solution in terms of allocating those costs to those choosing to move to Columbia instead of the poor families already residing here.
Mr. Skala stated he believed social equity as an overall goal was paramount, and the budget document reflected priorities and a balancing of those priorities. He commented that they funded much of the general fund and public safety through sales taxes, and were close to reaching that ceiling as they were near 10 percent. He noted the reason the general fund was not increasing as needed was due to internet sales, and unfortunately, the City could not do anything about that situation until the federal and state government changed some laws. He commented that he wanted to ensure they were prepared if there was an opportunity to collect revenues from internet sales in the future. He explained he believed financial equity was important as well, and sustainable growth was a key. He noted some in the development community had indicated to him that they understood development fees would need to be adjusted upward, but they could not agree on a model or to the extent of an increase. He believed the public and private sectors needed to share more equally in terms of costs in order to have an effective public-private partnership. He believed everyone would suffer without it. He hoped they revisited some of these issues in the context of the budget, their needs, and how they would pay for it.
Mr. Trapp complimented Mr. Matthes for a budget he believed reflected the values of the community. He commented that anyone could review the budget with an ideological lens and find something they did not support, but overall, it was reflective of the community. There was greater efficiency in that they continued to do as much as they always had, but with fewer resources when factoring in population growth and inflation. He thanked Mayor McDavid for the recommendation of spending $5 million in fund balance to pay down the pensions, and noted it would not get the kind of attention he thought it should. He thanked the Fire Department and the firefighters union for identifying potential savings in the service agreement with the Boone County Fire Protection District. He also thanked City staff for freeing up officers to work on the streets by hiring non-officers to certain positions. During his time in office, they had kept up with population growth in terms of adding public safety officers, even in tough budget times. He stated he was most pleased with the strong move to deal with homelessness issues by supporting the Welcome Home project. He noted he worked closely with Welcome Home on a daily basis, and they were an admirable organization that ran on a shoestring budget. This was a wonderful project, which he was
7

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
happy to see the City support in a real way. He reiterated he thought the budget balanced well with the values of the community, and was curious to see if the support for the Maplewood Home drew a tenth of the negative reaction the support for the Blind Boone Home had, as he did not believe it would.
Ms. Nauser thanked Mr. Matthes and City staff for their work on the budget. She also thanked the Commission on Cultural Affairs as she believed the arts and culture of Columbia helped it to stand out amongst its peers. She noted the Commission on Cultural Affairs and the Community Development Commission worked hard to ensure they had a fair and open process, so she was happy to support their recommendations for funding. She commented that she was supportive of this new way of budgeting in terms of saving money throughout the year in order to apply those savings to one time projects that were important and reflected community values. She stated she believed, as a country, they had abandoned veterans, and noted it was refreshing to see community support for veterans in Columbia. She felt the contribution by the City for the Welcome Home project was valiant and worthwhile.
Mayor McDavid reiterated the public hearing on the budget would continue at the next two Council Meetings.

(B) B219-15

Setting property tax rates for 2015 for the City of Columbia. Setting property tax rates for 2015.

Item B was read by the Clerk, and B219-15 was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Blattel provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid opened the public hearing. There being no comment, Mayor McDavid closed the public hearing. Mayor McDavid pointed out Columbia's property tax rate was less than 50 percent of the average in the State of Missouri, and 20 percent of the property taxes of comparable university communities. This low property tax was one of the reasons for the small public safety force. Mr. Skala commented that they had essentially ceded property taxes to the Columbia Public School District. He stated police and fire services protected property so it made some sense to increase those taxes to fund those services, but that ballot issue had failed so they would need to continue to try and find efficiencies. He believed they would have to determine how to balance the needs of all of the governmental agencies at some point in the future. B219-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

OLD BUSINESS
B226-15 Calling a special election on the question whether to extend the oneeighth of one percent local parks sales tax. R135-15 Specifying how the City Council intends to use funds that would be generated by the proposed extension of the one-eighth of one percent local parks sales tax.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk, and the resolution was read by the
Clerk.

8

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Mr. Griggs provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood the land acquisition percentage was lower for this ballot issue than it had been in 2010, and asked for clarification. Mr. Griggs replied it was about $250,000 less for this ballot issue than it had been in 2010, and explained staff was not sure the citizens would be supportive of adding more money for preservation. In addition, they felt they would have enough money for the list of targeted acquisitions they had developed with the assistance of the Greenbelt Land Trust. He noted a closed meeting would likely occur in January to discuss priorities with regard to these acquisitions. Mr. Skala understood there was difficulty since it was not a specific project and seemed to always be a moving target. Mr. Griggs commented that if the tax brought in more money than was anticipated, the extra money could go towards acquisitions. Ms. Nauser noted a recommendation of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence was for a cultural and community center in the First Ward area, and asked if it would be possible to convert the Armory into this type of center once the Philips Park facility was built. Mr. Griggs replied currently all adult basketball and volleyball leagues played at the Armory, and those leagues along with the sports staff would be relocated to the new facility at Philips Park so time would be freed up for other events. He pointed out the community recreation staff had some ideas for the Armory, but there would still likely be free time for something other than sports leagues. Ms. Peters asked if a TDD would be used to pay for some of the items associated with the sports facility at Philips Park. Mr. Griggs replied he thought the TDD would only be involved in terms of transportation to the Park, but not anything within the Park. He pointed out he did not know the details because that TDD had a change in ownership, etc. Ms. Thompson stated that TDD was not in effect. Ms. Peters asked for further clarification. Ms. Thompson replied the original TDD was vacated, and she did not believe the second TDD included the Park, but noted they could check on it. Ms. Peters asked how much latitude the City had to move items around if there was other land acquisitions or if other funding became available to help with these projects. Mr. Griggs replied staff liked to stay on target, and preferred not to move money from a project they indicated they would do to some other project. He, however, noted each project would go through the public improvement process. He commented that if the Council wanted to increase funds for land preservation, they should ask for that change now. He explained their success had been associated with the fact staff would do what the Council had indicated would be done when asking for support of the ballot issue. Mr. Matthes pointed out this was their best guess in terms of revenues from this sales tax. If the revenue was greater than anticipated, the Council could earmark excess funds to be used toward land acquisition first. This would allow the emphasis for that priority while still allowing the other projects identified to be completed. Jan Dye, 2222 Bluff Boulevard, stated she was a member of the Environment and Energy Commission (EEC) and noted the Commission was in full support of the renewal of the one-eighth of one percent local parks sales tax. They were, however, also concerned with the reduction in the amount dedicated to acquisition and land preservation. In 2010, it was 17 percent and for 2015, it was 13.3 percent. That line item also included some trail
9

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
improvement and grant matching funds, which further reduced the amount for acquisitions. An EEC subcommittee had discussed this budget and believed the 2015 tax proposal should devote a percent similar to the 2010 tax. They felt the preservation of natural areas would only become more expensive and harder to find as Columbia grew and prospered. Purchasing undeveloped areas, for example along the Hinkson Creek, would be beneficial to the long-term preservation of natural areas.
John Corn, 100 S. Glenwood Avenue, commented that he was speaking on behalf of the Columbia Farmers Market, and stated they supported the parks sales tax extension, specifically the funds provided for the Clary-Shy improvements. He noted the Columbia Farmers Market, which was located at Clary-Shy Park, had provided fresh, locally produced farm products since the 1980s, and it continued to be the largest and most diverse farmers market serving the mid-state area. They hoped this parks sales tax extension would be the start of a permanent building that would allow them to serve more shoppers and vendors in a more amenable environment. They envisioned a sheltered space that would allow vendors and shoppers to mingle in an open and relaxed environment with products and people protected from the elements. He urged the Council for its support of making this long held dream a reality.
Adam Saunders, 214 St. Joseph Street, stated he was speaking on behalf of the Columbia Center for Urban Agriculture and noted they were in favor of this ballot initiative. They had been meeting with the Columbia Farmers Market, Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board, and City staff to explore a collaborative public-private partnership of integrating urban agriculture at the same site mentioned by Mr. Corn. They were excited about the prospect and looked forward to an exploration of how a partnership might evolve.
Kathryn Roberts, 4445 Roemer Road, explained she was the Vice-Chair of the Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board, and noted they held the lease to where the Columbia Farmers Market was located and worked closely with the Center for Urban Agriculture. She understood health was a top priority for the City of Columbia and their residents, and Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. had taken an active role in this effort through the Access to Healthy Foods program. Citizens active in receiving SNAP benefits could receive matching funds from Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. to use to shop at the Columbia Farmers Market, and that would help support the community, local growers, and those in need of accessing healthier foods. She commented that she believed the parks sales tax would further their mission through their partnership with the City of Columbia.
Annette Triplett, 201 W. Broadway, stated she was the Executive Director of the PedNet Coalition and noted they were strongly in favor of placing the park sales tax on the ballot for renewal. She commented that investments in community parks helped Columbia to be vibrant and thriving. She explained parks were an economic driver as they encouraged people to move to communities, and listed statistics from a study conducted by the University of Missouri, which indicated many people tended to choose to live on property near trails and that those trails positively improved their quality of life. She pointed out the parks sales tax also contributed to the creation of active transportation options by building out the trail network. She commented that the top three priorities of the PedNet Coalition Board of the trail projects being considered by the Parks and Recreation Department were the Hinkson
10

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Creek Trail, the Bear Creek Trail, and the COLT Railroad Trail. She pointed out the Perche Creek Trail had been ranked the lowest in terms of priority by the PedNet Coalition Board. They understood the Bear Creek Trail had to be removed from the project list, but were happy to see the inclusion of the Hinkson Creek Trail. She explained they felt the Perche Creek Trail should the lowest in priority because it was in the Fourth Ward, which already had the MKT Trail and was the closest to the Katy Trail. It was not considered a high need area compared to the Second and Third Wards, which had fewer trails and higher proportions of lower income populations, who typically had less access to park and trail facilities. She noted they favored the COLT Railroad Trail as it would serve the Third, First, and Second Wards and connect to the downtown. If it was not possible to include the COLT Railroad Trail on this project list, she asked that it be given a high priority for future trail funding.
Paul Blythe explained he represented the Diamond Council of Columbia, Missouri, which was a softball and baseball league that utilized the Antimi Sports Complex, OaklandAlbert Park, the Atkins Baseball Complex, and American Legion Park, and they wholeheartedly supported placing the parks sales tax on the ballot. He noted they had served approximately 3,000 kids this year, and had a scholarship program for those in need. He understood the parks sales tax money would go towards fixing issues on some existing fields and developing new fields. He reiterated their support for this sales tax on the ballot.
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, commented that he was not supportive of an athletic complex being placed on the Philips Lake property because he believed it would only be utilized by the rich or those that were Catholic. He felt a location in the First Ward should be considered for a sports complex, and pointed out the ARC was not accessible for people in need. He suggested a complex that could be assessable to everyone in the public.
Ms. Nauser commented that Council had previously discussed the percentages by categories and had based much of those discussions on the citizen survey. She thought that was the reason there had been a decrease in funding for land preservation and an increase in funding for taking care of the facilities the City already had. She also believed the complex at Philips Park would allow the City to repurpose the Armory for the youth in the central city. She noted she supported placing the sales tax on the ballot in November.
Mr. Skala stated he liked the idea of dedicating any excess revenues from this sales tax to land acquisition so they were not forced to pass up on any acquisition opportunities. He also thought they should get close to the funding amount on the previous ballot issue. He commented that the Hinkson Creek Trail had not been funded back in 2009-2010 because it had been very controversial, and the COLT Railroad Trail had not made the cut then due the limited amount of funds remaining. He understood the COLT Railroad Trail would be considered during the next opportunity, and believed this might be the time to consider it.
Mayor McDavid commented that he believed there was inherent flexibility because the Marketplace Fairness Act could pass or parks sales tax revenues could be higher than anticipated, and the Council at that time could choose its own priorities with those funds.
Mr. Skala stated he felt strongly about allocating extra funds to land acquisition, but also felt they needed to address some particular projects, such as the COLT Railroad Trail.
Ms. Peters asked staff how funds could be shifted to increase the amount allocated to land acquisition. Mr. Griggs replied the Waters-Moss Phase II Improvements involved
11

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
contracting for the renovations of the Waters House at a cost estimate of $125,000 and that work could potentially be done by City staff. In addition to eliminating that project from the project list, he thought the Annual Park Improvements ­ Major Maintenance project could be reduced by $125,000. This $250,000 could then go to the Annual Land Acquisition project so it was the same amount it had been for the 2010 ballot issue.
Mr. Griggs pointed out the reason the COLT Railroad Trail had not been included in this project list was because they did not know the status of the COLT Railroad. He explained that if Boone County Lumber relocated and there was no longer a need for the railroad to travel downtown, they would have a ready-made trail. He noted staff felt they should hold off on the COLT Railroad Trail until they knew what the future held. They were concerned with taking a trail across the Business Loop as it would require a bridge and involve the intersection of the Business Loop and Paris Road.
Mr. Skala understood the Municipal Power Plan might not use coal in the future, which would impact the railroad and the hesitation in moving forward with the COLT Railroad Trail project now, but noted he was also concerned that it would continue to be delayed as it had been discussed since about 2009. He thought it was a critical piece of the trail network. Mr. Griggs stated the COLT Railroad Trail was a priority for staff as well, but they believed the Hinkson Creek Trail ­ Stephens to Clark Lane could be accomplished more easily and that entire side would then be connected to the downtown.
Mr. Thomas asked if funds had already been allocated for the Grindstone to Stephens Lake projects, Options 1 and 3. Mr. Griggs replied no if he was referring to the Shepard to Rollins project. He understood a study was currently being conducted and that some of the 2010 parks sales tax funds might be used for it if there was enough funding. Mr. Thomas asked if he thought the project could be accomplished with GetAbout funding and the surplus from the last sales tax. Mr. Griggs replied he believed the project was dependent upon the University of Missouri, and once staff knew what would be allowed on that property, they could determine the cost and whether they had enough funding for it. He thought they would be close, but noted he was uncertain.
Mr. Trapp made a motion to amend R135-15 so the Annual Park Improvements ­ Major Maintenance project was reduced $125,000, the Waters-Moss Phase II Improvements project, which had been funded at $125,000, was eliminated, and the Annual Land Acquisition: Parks, Greenways and Natural Areas project was increased by $250,000. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote.
Mr. Trapp commented that he had participated on the parks ballot committee and noted he had been impressed by staff as they were driven by survey and were trying to be receptive to the needs of the entire community. He noted they also did a good job of providing a high level of detail with regard to all of the neighborhood parks and improvements. He explained it had been an open process, and this great product level was not accomplished by accident. He stated he was happy to support this.
Mr. Thomas agreed with Mr. Trapp and felt staff did a great job of polling citizens, studying the data, making promises on deliverable improvements, and delivering on those improvements. He commented that the ARC and the Columbia Farmers Market were on the Clary-Shy Park property, which also included a large area of unused land, and believed the
12

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Farmers Market was a tremendous asset for the community in terms of an economic driver as 3,000 people purchased healthy local foods from it every Saturday for about eight months per year. He felt the Farmers Market would not reach its full potential without a shelter as more people would likely visit if there was a shelter. In addition, the Farmers Market could operate year-round. He explained there was a coalition of three non-profits in this effort, and noted the Sustainable Farms and Communities Inc. Board also ran the Access to Healthy Foods program, which tied well with the social equity goals of the City's strategic plan, and the Center for Urban Agriculture employed people and produced healthy local food. He thought supporting a project such as that would create a healthy and viable economic program in a great location in the center of town, and asked that a work session be scheduled to discuss this if the park sales tax passed.
B226-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:
The vote on R135-15, as amended, was recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Resolution declared adopted, reading as follows:
B227-15 Approving the Administrative Plat of Creek Ridge, Plat No. 1-A, a Replat of Lots 1-14, 27-31, 34-49 and 76-77 of Creek Ridge Plat No. 1, located on the south side of Old Plank Road and west of Bethel Church Road; authorizing a performance contract; granting continued approval of a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction subject to conditions.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Mr. Teddy provided a staff report. Mr. Thomas asked for the staff recommendation in 2005 with regard to the sidewalk variance. Mr. Teddy replied he did not recall, but thought the issue had been thoroughly vetted at the time. In looking at the request this year, staff had reviewed whether the conditions had changed, and nothing had been done with the road. The subdivision across the street, which was a row of single-family homes, did not have a sidewalk either. He noted there were three projects between Providence Road and the end of Old Plank Road at Route K that had installed sidewalks, but he believed those conditions had been more conducive to installing sidewalks in accordance with the standards of the City. Mr. Thomas understood there was a pedway on the west side of Forum Boulevard that would align with the pedway for this development. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and described its route. Mr. Thomas understood the pedway on Forum Boulevard connected to Southampton Drive and Nifong Boulevard. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct. Mr. Thomas asked if it would be possible to construct a pedestrian crossing across Old Plank Road to link the pedway in the development to the pedway that provided access to the rest of Columbia. Mr. Teddy replied he thought they would need to consult with the Public Works Department on that issue. Mr. Skala commented that this project had initially been approved prior to the time the Council had set a priority toward ensuring sidewalks were in place, and understood the argument in terms of topography issues, but felt this subdivision should be connected in
13

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
some manner. Mr. Teddy stated the two points of connectivity for pedestrians would be the north-south pedway system and a trail connection, which he showed on the map on the overhead.
Mayor McDavid understood this was an administrative replat of one lot, and it had already been reviewed by the Planning and Zoning Commission. He did not believe the Council was re-reviewing the entire process. Mr. Teddy explained the Council was reviewing the continued approval of a variance as part of their action tonight. Mayor McDavid understood the variance had previously been granted, and this was only a replat. Mr. Teddy stated that was correct, and pointed out staff had approved permits to resume construction on this subdivision. The property had been platted by a previous owner, and Mr. Overton, who had acquired the property in its entirety, wanted to privatize the common area so he could construct larger lots. The reconfigured plat had been submitted to the City after staff had issued construction permits for the infrastructure.
Tim Crockett, 2608 N. Stadium Boulevard, commented that this was simply an administrative replat as they wanted to extend some lots lines into the previously platted common lot. He pointed out a temporary construction easement would be granted for Old Plank Road as part of this project, and that meant the City would not have to expend money trying to acquire those easements later when Old Plank Road was improved. He explained the replat would allow for larger lots, and the trees would not be any less preserved.
Ms. Nauser stated this was in the Fifth Ward and agreed there was a steep slope associated with the project. She noted she would support this administrative replat since nothing would change other than the size of the lots. She commented that she planned to honor the variances approved by a previous Council.
B227-15 was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

B234-15 Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Human Services for tobacco control coalition services; appropriating funds.
The bill was given second reading by the Clerk. Ms. Browning provided a staff report. Ms. Nauser made a motion to amend B234-15 per the amendment sheet. The motion was seconded by Mr. Skala and approved unanimously by voice vote. B234-15, as amended, was given third reading with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER, PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bill declared enacted, reading as follows:

CONSENT AGENDA
The following bills were given second reading and the resolutions were read by the Clerk.

B218-15

Amending Chapter 2 of the City Code relating to conflicts of interest and financial disclosure procedures.

14

B228-15

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Approving the Final Plat of On The Ninth At Old Hawthorne, Plat No. 1, a Replat of Lot 3-A of Old Hawthorne Plat No. 1-A, located east of the intersection of Old Hawthorne Drive West and Pergola Drive; authorizing a performance contract.

B229-15

Authorizing a contract for sale of real estate with Columbia Community Development Corporation II for the purchase of property located at 109, 111 and 113 Lynn Street.

B230-15

Declaring the need to acquire easements for construction of the MKT to Parkade Bike Boulevard Project.

B231-15

Authorizing a right of use permit with McAlester Park, LLC for the construction, improvement, operation and maintenance of a private storm sewer and retaining wall in a portion of the Ninth Street and Elm Street rights-of-way.

B232-15

Authorizing Amendment 3 to the general cooperative agreement with the Boone County Regional Sewer District relating to sewer service within the Midway area and financial participation in the construction of the Henderson Branch Sewer Extension project.

B233-15 Accepting a conveyance for utility purposes.

B235-15

Appropriating funds received from donations and miscellaneous revenue to the Parks and Recreation Department.

B236-15

Appropriating funds received from the Columbia Chamber of Commerce relating to the construction of repairs and upgrades to the Thomas G. Walton Building.

B237-15

Accepting a donation from Boone Electric Cooperative to be used by the Fire Department for the purchase of public education supplies relating to fire prevention; appropriating funds.

R129-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages for a Ninth Street SummerFest concert.

R130-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages along portions of Park Avenue and Orr Street for the annual Mid-Missouri PrideFest celebration.

R131-15

Granting a temporary waiver from the requirements of Section 16-185 of the City Code to allow possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages along an alley between Eighth Street and Ninth Street for a wedding reception at Broadway Brewery.

R132-15

Authorizing an agreement with the Memorial Day Weekend - Salute to Veterans Corporation for an air show to be held at Columbia Regional Airport May 25 - 30, 2016; authorizing the City Manager to provide support services for the Memorial Day activities planned by that organization; and authorizing a parachute jump onto Broadway.

R133-15 Approving the by-laws of the Gary-Atkins Neighborhood Association.

R134-15

Expressing support for the Columbia Housing Authority's applications to the Missouri Housing Development Commission for low income housing tax credits.

The bills were given third reading and the resolutions were read with the vote recorded as follows: VOTING YES: NAUSER (except for R129-15, R130-15, and R131-15 on which

15

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
she abstained), PETERS, MCDAVID, RUFFIN, TRAPP, SKALA, THOMAS. VOTING NO: NO ONE. Bills declared enacted and resolutions declared adopted, reading as follows:

NEW BUSINESS

None.

INTRODUCTION AND FIRST READING

The following bills were introduced by the Mayor unless otherwise indicated, and all were given first reading.

PR136-15 Establishing a revised policy relating to the repair, maintenance and restoration of brick paved streets in the City of Columbia.

B238-15

Approving the Final Plat of Howell Subdivision, Plat No. 3 located on the

northwest corner of

Strawn Road (Route ZZ) and West Broadway;

authorizing a performance contract; granting variances from the

Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction and direct

driveway access; setting forth conditions for approval.

B239-15

Approving the Final Plat of Hasheider Subdivision, a Replat of Lot 11 and part of Lot 10 of R.B. Price's Subdivision, located on the east side of Melbourne Street and the north side of Windsor Street (204 Melbourne Street and 1403 Windsor Street); granting a variance from the Subdivision Regulations relating to sidewalk construction.

B240-15

Vacating a water and electric easement within Vesser's Subdivision Plat No. 2 located on the west side of Fourth Street and south of Conley Avenue.

B241-15

Authorizing a consolidated grant agreement with the Missouri Highways and Transportation Commission for transportation planning services.

B242-15

Authorizing construction of a solid waste administration and collection operations facilities building at the Columbia Sanitary Landfill; calling for bids through the Purchasing Division; appropriating funds.

B243-15

Authorizing a road improvement agreement with Boone County, Missouri relating to the Scott Boulevard Phase III project; appropriating funds.

B244-15

Authorizing a first amended and restated development agreement with Jeffrey E. Smith Investment Co. relating to property located on the southeast corner of Nifong Boulevard and Bethel Street.

B245-15

Amending Chapter 14 of the City Code to revise the speed limit on portions of Providence Road and State Route K.

B246-15

Authorizing a license agreement with Tripwire, Inc. to provide cybersecurity tools as part of the Energy Management System (EMS) implementation.

B247-15 Accepting a conveyance for utility purposes.

B248-15

Authorizing a program services contract with the Missouri Department of Health and Senior Services for the Teen Outreach Program (TOP).

B249-15

Authorizing an easement release agreement with Missouri CVS Pharmacy, L.L.C. and the Mary M. Hackett Trust No. 1 relating to the vacation of sewer easements located on the southeast corner of Providence Road and Broadway conditioned upon construction of new sewer facilities within public rights-of-way and surface parking areas.

16

REPORTS AND PETITIONS

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting

REP81-15 Fraternity/Sorority Sprinkling.

Fire Chief White provided a staff report. Mayor McDavid asked if a waiver could be granted in terms of liability. He commented that the City had recommended a sprinkler system be installed, but the organization chose not to comply, so he wondered if that organization could then be responsible if there was a fire. Ms. Thompson understood Mayor McDavid was referring to an indemnity clause with higher insurances in place instead of a waiver. Mayor McDavid asked if the Council would be amenable to that type of scenario. Mr. Skala commented that it would be a disaster if anyone was hurt due to these houses not being sprinkled. He explained he would be amenable to providing more time, but did not want to provide another three years. He suggested one year with benchmarks to determine progress. Mr. Ruffin understood some of the fraternity houses were involved in capital campaigns to build new facilities, and that would likely not be accomplished within a year as they had projected three years or more. He asked what type of benchmarks they would want to see. Chief White replied they would want to know continuous progress was being made toward the goal. He pointed out one of the reasons the initial time frame was seven years was because these were extensive projects that might be difficult in terms of raising money. They were now close to the end of that seven-year period and six houses had not yet complied. He explained the difficulty with extending it further with no benchmarks was that there was no incentive to continually progress to an end solution. His concern was that some of these houses would still not be compliant at the end of another three-year extension. Ms. Peters noted two houses had come to the Council to request extensions, and asked about the plans for the other four houses. Chief White replied the others had not contacted the Fire Department. Ms. Thompson pointed out there were significant differences between the two requests made to Council. One request involved a three-month extension, and the other involved a longer period. She commented that the deadline was March 16, 2016. In terms of liability, there was not much difference between the start of the spring semester and when the students moved out as the same students would be there the entire time. She thought extending the deadline to the end of the semester was very different than extending it for number of years since many other homes had already complied. Mayor McDavid asked if it would be appropriate to extend it to the end of the semester. Ms. Nauser asked if they also wanted to look at a one year extension with benchmarks. Mr. Skala thought they could extend it multiple times, but believed they wanted to ensure there was pressure so progress was made. Mayor McDavid suggested only extending it to the end of the semester, and placing the onus on those houses that had not complied to ask Council for more time as they would otherwise be shut down for the following school year. Ms. Nauser asked which houses had already asked for an extension. Chief White replied Sigma Nu and Delta Tau Delta. Ms. Nauser understood those two had the largest

17

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
occupancies, which likely meant they had larger homes requiring more of a capital campaign. She wondered if the smaller ones had capital campaigns or had planned on being compliant by the deadline. She asked if they knew the status of the other four houses. Chief White replied they did not, and noted there had not been any permit requests. He pointed out staff had reached out via e-mail and certified letter to remind them of the deadline.
Mr. Skala agreed with the suggestion of an extension to the end of the school year. Ms. Nauser agreed anyone that could not comply by then would have to make a very good pitch for any extension. She wondered if they would allow for different extensions for different houses.
Mr. Matthes commented that he agreed it made a difference in terms of whether they planned to build a new building or retrofit the existing home with a sprinkler system. He commented that many apartment buildings and fraternity and sorority houses had already complied so it was achievable. He thought they could give everyone until the end of the semester and pull the occupancy permit for any houses that were not in compliance, meaning no one would live in the houses the following school year, unless the Council was shown how they planned to sprinkle the buildings.
Ms. Peters asked if that meant the deadline would be extended to June 1, 2016, and any house not compliant would have to make its case. Ms. Nauser thought they might want an ultimate deadline as she did not want to provide a three-year extension, and then be asked for another extension.
Chief White explained it would be helpful to staff if they could determine the process by which to request an extension beyond the initial extension of the end of the semester. He noted each house would likely be at different stages and would then come to Council at different times for an extension. He suggested a process outside of coming to Council at which a majority of the work could be done.
Mr. Skala understood a few suggestions had been made in the memo. Mayor McDavid commented that he was not sure he would know what benchmarks to apply. Chief White stated physical items would be easier to monitor in terms of benchmarks, and provided examples such as the water supply, plans from a certified fire sprinkler installer, etc. He was not sure how they would monitor or enforce any fundraising benchmarks. Mayor McDavid asked if staff was recommending the third recommendation. Mr. Skala replied he did not believe they were since those benchmarks applied to longer extensions.
Chief White suggested providing an extension to June 1, 2016, and any house unable to comply by that date would go to staff with a plan so appropriate benchmarks could be established for each particular situation since some would want to demolish the existing structure and build a new one while others would retrofit the existing structure. Each extension could be tailored for each unique circumstance.
Mr. Skala thought that was a good idea. Mayor McDavid asked if staff could move forward based on this consensus. Chief White replied yes.
Mr. Trapp understood some people predicted the demise of fraternities and sororities based on this sprinkling requirement when it had been discussed almost seven years ago, and pointed out that had not occurred.
18

REP82-15 Solid Waste Utility.

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting

Mayor McDavid commented that this was the first time he had seen information monetizing the impact of not changing the solid waste system, and understood employment costs, workman compensation costs, recruitment costs, etc. would result in close to $3 million over the next ten years. He noted if the citizens wanted to continue with the existing system, the City could charge enough to cover those costs. He understood the recommendation of staff was to wait until the initiative petition process played out since there was one in progress. Mr. Glascock replied yes, and pointed out this would not prevent them from going to a "pay as you throw" system. It only involved roll carts.
Mr. Glascock pointed out the forecast had been provided to Council by e-mail today as it had inadvertently been left out of the report.
Mr. Skala stated he thought it was good advice to wait until the initiative petition process was played out. He appreciated how the data was illustrated in graphics, etc. as it was helpful for him.
Mr. Thomas noted the report included examples with three cart options, and asked if there was a smaller roll cart than the 35-38 gallon roll cart. Mr. Glascock replied he thought the smallest one the City had looked into was 32 gallons, and that was about the smallest they could obtain. Mr. Thomas understood the 35 gallon roll cart would hold 2-3 trash bags and many people only produced one half-full trash bag. Ms. Buffaloe explained the communities that had the very small, narrow roll carts had a different style truck that was made for a more urban environment. If they tried to utilize those smaller roll carts with standard trucks, the cart had the potential to be crushed or fall into the bin, which would result in a loss of the workers compensation savings.
Mr. Thomas commented that England had a system of alternating trash and recycle weeks so trash and recycling was built up for two weeks instead of one, and asked if that had been considered. Mr. Glascock replied it had, but noted it resulted in the same costs.
Mayor McDavid understood the Columbia Daily Tribune had conducted an unscientific poll of 93 people, and a half did not care, a third wanted wheelie-bins, and one-sixth wanted to continue with the current system. He noted this was what made the decision so difficult, and suggested they allow it to play out.
Mr. Glascock pointed out this involved three departments and they had not had any conceived notions when they began this process. He noted the City was often criticized for having a solution prior to going into a process, which was the reason they purposely did not go in with a solution, and they were still criticized.
Mr. Thomas asked if staff had indicated the City might move forward with a "pay as you throw" system without wheelie-bins. Mr. Glascock replied that was an option. He noted they could do "pay as you throw" bags, a hybrid, etc., and pointed out he thought they should move forward with some "pay as you throw" system as it tended to increase recycling rates. Mayor McDavid asked if it had to be done as part of next year's budget. Mr. Glascock replied it was not a part of the budget. Mr. Matthes reiterated the budget was balanced without it.
Mayor McDavid suggested they not move forward with "pay as you throw" yet. Mr. Thomas understood he would prefer to continue with the current system until they saw how the petition process played out. Mayor McDavid stated that was correct.
19

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Ms. Nauser commented that she was supportive of a "pay as you throw" system and had an issue with throwing plastic bags into plastic bags. In addition, if they were still providing bags, the issues related to workers compensation would continue. She thought they needed to find a "pay as you throw" system that did not require throwing plastic bags into plastic bags, would accommodate separate clear bags for yard waste, and would not require workers to pick up excessively heavy bags even if it meant smaller bags. Mr. Glascock agreed it would help tremendously if they could reduce 50 pound bags to 25 pounds. Mr. Skala pointed out 25 pounds was heavy for some people.
Mayor McDavid felt the consensus of Council was that something would change. Mr. Trapp commented that he had been impressed with the report and the public engagement process, and noted he was supportive of a hybrid system. He suspected the issue of roll carts would go to the vote of the people, and suggested they not impose it on the people. He understood particular people not wanting roll carts, but did not feel it was reasonable to not allow someone else to have a roll cart. He thought telegraphing their intentions toward a hybrid system would be the best option to be able to have any type of roll carts, and noted he believed the worker safety issue was the most compelling issue.
REP83-15 Environment and Energy Commission - 2015 International Energy Efficiency Code for Residential and Commercial Structures.
Mayor McDavid stated he believed this recommendation should be passed on to the Building Construction Codes Commission for their review even though he thought they would oppose it. Mr. Skala thought that had been past custom, and agreed the Building Construction Codes Commission and the Environment and Energy Commission should have those conversations. He stated he believed energy efficiency was a win-win situation as the cost of energy would go down in a permanent way, but there would be some people that would argue this would increase the cost of construction, which was why he thought the two groups should discuss it further.
REP84-15 Columbia Municipal Power Plant.
Mr. Johnsen and Mr. Johanningmeier provided a staff report. Mr. Skala understood the Municipal Power Plant provided capacity in terms of energy, and asked if the judicial rulings involving mercury had been discussed as well. Mr. Johanningmeier replied the Environmental Pollution Agency (EPA) ruling was with a similar but different rule. It was the Utility MACT rule, which affected larger boilers. This boiler was relatively small and was actually covered under the Industrial Boiler MACT rule. Mr. Johnsen clarified they were not affected by the utility mercury rules. Mr. Skala understood this would significantly affect the railroad as well since the City would no longer use coal. Mr. Johnsen stated that was correct, and noted staff would conduct a business planning process for the railroad next year to evaluate the impacts to the railroad and what could be done with regard to the railroad. Mr. Skala asked what would happen to the boiler if there was not a future for it. Mr. Johnsen replied there were four boilers at the Plant, and two were natural gas boilers while the other two were solid fuel boilers, so there would be generation at the Plant with the
20

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
natural gas boilers for the foreseeable future. Mr. Skala understood the boilers that were not used would be decommissioned. Mr. Johanningmeier pointed out the Plant contained old boilers from the early part of the last century. They were essentially abandoned in place. Mr. Johnsen noted Boiler No. 6 was the oldest working boiler now, and Boiler Nos. 1-4 were still in the Plant. He reiterated staff wanted the Council to know they were likely done combusting coal at the Municipal Power Plant as of October 13, 2015.
Mr. Trapp asked if any of these changes would affect any of the City's existing power purchase agreements. Mr. Johnsen replied no. He pointed out the Council authorized a capacity contract a few months ago, and that would replace some of the capacity these boiler units produced. He explained they had some system operational issues because these old plants had been designed to be integral to the substations, which meant they were tied closely as a transmission line was not involved. As a result, staff would have to work through the long-term impact on the system of the operational effects this Plant had on the substations. Ms. Thompson stated she thought there was a coal purchase agreement that the City would have to discontinue, and they might have to resell some of the coal. She thought there could be some other minor obligations, but did not believe there were any longterm contracts. Mr. Johnsen commented that the contract had included language indicating it could be terminated based upon regulatory changes. If that was not acceptable for some reason, they would resell the coal as there was a market. He thought it might result in a small financial impact.
REP85-15 Vision Commission - Media Mention Reports.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
REP86-15 Intra-Departmental Transfer of Funds Request.
Mayor McDavid understood this report had been provided for informational purposes.
COMMENTS BY PUBLIC, COUNCIL AND STAFF
Eugene Elkin, 3406 Range Line Street, stated his appreciation for funding the Welcome Home project and believed they would soon need to think about working with the homeless that were housed at the Wilkes Methodist Church. He thought a campaign would be needed to raise money for them.
Mr. Elkin understood a CID had been established on the Business Loop, and felt any additional taxes would negatively impact those in the First Ward due to their income levels.
Mr. Elkin commented that the losses in revenue were due to the fact people could shop elsewhere and did not have to come to Columbia to find a particular item.
Mr. Elkin stated he believed the lives of firefighters were just as important as the lives of police officers or anyone else, and asked the Council to not provide too long of extensions for the houses that still needed to install sprinkler systems.
Mr. Elkin commented that he thought the majority of citizens did not want roll carts, and suggested the Council move on to other items, such as smaller bags as mentioned by Ms. Nauser.
Mr. Elkin stated he did not believe the utilities should be raised any further as it negatively impacted the poor.
21

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
Rick Shanker, 1829 Cliff Drive, explained he was on the Building Construction Codes Commission, which had wrestled with the issue of fire sprinklers in fraternity and sorority houses, and noted he supported the three-year extension as long as there were benchmarks to show good intentions. He pointed out he was not speaking on behalf of the Commission and was only providing his opinion.
Mr. Shanker stated he was a member of the Board of Electrical Examiners, and noted they had increased their fees about three years. He understood the need to increases to support staff in the Building and Site Division, but asked if any cuts could be made in that division to help reduce the increase in fees.
Mary Sapp, 3405 Creasy Springs Road, commented that she had a notice for one of the solid waste ward meetings, and it had indicated the City wanted ideas and that their voices would be part of a report to the Council and be used to inform the City of potential changes. She noted a vote had been taken at five of the six ward meetings, and the results of those votes had not been included in the solid waste report. The majority of people at every session was against roll carts and wanted to retain the bag system. She pointed out they had other suggestions from those meetings that would address workers compensation, worker retention, and recycling, and noted they had also requested time at a pre-council meeting to reveal those suggestions made by the community. She again asked for time at a pre-council meeting to discuss these issues with the Council.
Bob Cunningham stated he was an architect that represented two of the fraternity houses that had not yet complied with the installation of a sprinkler system, and those houses were Delta Tau Delta and Lamba Chi Alpha. He appreciated the consideration by Council of an extension of the deadline on sprinkler issue for fraternities that were seriously considering the constructing of a new house as he believed that would be beneficial to the City. He displayed images of the insides of fraternity houses, and stated that if a sprinkler system was required to be installed in an existing facility, it might not operate correctly due to the lofts and other items located near the ceiling in existing fraternities. He commented that his firm had designed a number of bedroom types to specifically prevent this problem, and displayed images illustrating their designs in new construction that would allow for a sprinkler system to correctly work. He noted as a student had passed away due to a fire in the Sigma Chi house in 1999 because he had been in a student built loft that had been enclosed with drywall, and pointed out he was not certain a sprinkler system would have saved him because the enclosed loft might have blocked the sprinkler system from reaching the fire or blocked the smoke from setting off the alarm. He reiterated they could incorporate sprinkler systems that would operate correctly in the designs of newly constructed homes.
Tyree Byndom explained he resided in the Third Ward and stated he was representing a loosely organized group known as the Columbia Egalitarian Cooperative, which included about 100 citizens of Columbia from 12-15 groups. They were asking for the immediate resignation of Dale Roberts of the Columbia Police Officers Association (CPOA). He noted they did not have issues with any Columbia police officers, but did not feel Mr. Roberts was
22

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
bringing civic pride and creating unity to the community with his posts on the CPOA Facebook page. If Columbia police officers were a part of that system, he believed an alternative was needed. He commented that he had participated on the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, whose members had collaborated with many in the community to tackle some ancient issues faced in the United States. He listed and discussed items that had come from the report completed by the Task Force. He noted trust between the community and local law enforcement agencies had been listed as there was a trust gap between the African-American community and local law enforcement agencies, which needed to aggressively be addressed by the Police Department and the community. Robust and effective cultural competency training was needed for the Police Department and the Columbia Public Schools to provide avenues for relationship building. The implementation of a system of accountability with independent verification and public participation of the vision, mission, and goals, and the implementation of a system of professional development and promotion to train and retain of the best officers in terms of the rewards of softer skills of relationship building, community involvement, and cultural competency were also included recommendations in the report. In addition, they needed to help officers to feel appreciated and respected. He commented that the Columbia Egalitarian Cooperative would aggressively try to work with the City to ensure a robust process occurred, and asked the Council to view this as a huge issue. He stated his review of the budget did not show specific funding for the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence, and noted he thought that was necessary.
Traci Wilson-Kleekamp, 2905 Greenbriar Drive, commented that her concerns were the same as those of Mr. Byndom, and noted she was disappointed the budget did not address the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She believed they all needed to become more comfortable says black people had an almost 16 percent unemployment rate, which was awful, and that they should be specific with regard to what they were doing to improve that situation. She commented that she believed it was problem to make the assumption black people were committing all of the crimes and to profile based on that assumption. She stated there were race, perception, and trust problems in Columbia as well as a financial priority problem. She asked the Council to help her find where those priorities were in the budget. She pointed out that one of the reasons the situations in Ferguson, Missouri and Baltimore, Maryland had occurred was because the financial priorities for African-Americans, poor people, and those that were underserved had been historically ignored, and she believed that was happening in Columbia as well.
Mr. Matthes explained he had e-mailed the City Council last week indicating he could not recommend a public safety ballot in the future due to the Facebook post of Dale Roberts of the CPOA because he estimated a ballot would not pass given the incendiary nature of those comments and the ongoing nature of the international gaffs of Mr. Roberts, which undermined public confidence in Columbia police officers. He noted he had heard from police officers that the comment he made last week had made them feel uncertain about the future, and that he was penalizing them for the actions of the attorney of their union, and this pained him. He commented that while he was not empowered to place any ballot on an
23

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
election cycle, he did not want his words to make Columbia police officers question his support for them. He explained he was therefore taking back his statement of not recommending a ballot, and noted he would work to prepare a public safety ballot to place before the Council in 2017. He, however, saw no scenario in which it would pass until the CPOA dealt with its public relations nightmare. He commented that he continued to condemn the Facebook post of Mr. Roberts and his ongoing series of gaffs, which served to undermine all of the support the City had worked to build in terms of community relations.
Ms. Nauser stated she supported the Columbia Police Department and the fine men and women who kept the community safe. Since her re-election almost two years ago, she noted she had supported almost $3.2 million in budget increases, which included the FY 2016 budget, the addition of nine new officers, the unsuccessful 2015 ballot, which would have increased the number of police officers to a more acceptable level that was consistent with community growth, and the CIP ballot, which would create two police substations to make the community safer. She explained she was a co-chair of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence and that she had supported the pension solution that lowered the City's unfunded pension liabilities and strengthened the pension fund for public safety personnel. She stated she would continue to support the fine men and women of the Columbia Police Department within the fiscal constraints, but noted she did not support the public comments of the Columbia Police Officers Association (CPOA) representative, Dale Roberts. She commented that Mr. Roberts had continued to follow a pattern of sexist, racist, and divisive comments over the past two years. He had a pattern of posting incendiary comments, and then claiming his statements were misunderstood and apologizing for everyone's misunderstanding. She described some of those comments. In March 2013, he posted a Facebook comment regarding the replacement of the SWAT vehicle indicating they should purchase a Mercedes 6x16 as their new vehicle so the boys in the hood would all come running out of their houses to check out the vehicle. In April 2013, he commented that an illegal strip search was customer service on a Facebook post referencing sexual assault charges being filed against Texas police officers. In 2014, he sent a personal Christmas card to citizens within the community with the front cover being a photo of a car burning in Ferguson, Missouri under a "season's greeting" sign and a personal comment on the inside saying "only seven more days of looting until Christmas." Last weekend, he called for a commemorative day on Facebook honoring the tragic situation whereby Officer Darren Wilson had to use the highest power granted as a police officer in the taking of another person's life as Darren Wilson Day ­ August 9, 2015. She pointed out his comments brought national and international attention to the community and the fine men and women of the Columbia Police Department and the police profession in general, and added to the growing negative and sometimes hostile sentiments against police officers from all demographics and regions of the country. She noted the CPOA Board had never condemned or addressed the comments, and wondered why they were silent. She understood the CPOA Board and its members had every right to keep and retain the services of Mr. Roberts, and quoted Dietrich Bonhoeffer as saying "not to speak is to speak, not to act is to act." The only actions and words she had seen was the continued pattern by Mr. Roberts of incendiary statements, the
24

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
claim of his misunderstandings, and his apologies for such misunderstandings. Unfortunately, she had not seen actions or words from the CPOA organization that discredit or seek to end these comments that disgraced the community, the fine men and women of the police force, and the police force in general. She hoped the community could heal from these comments and noted she, Mr. Trapp, and others planned to further discuss the recommendations of the Mayor's Task Force on Community Violence. She understood there was money in the budget associated with some Task Force recommendations although it was not specifically referenced, and explained the new parks facility that would potentially be built at Philips Lake Park would free up space in the Armory to potentially be a centralized location for a cultural and community center for the youth. She knew there had been a lot of good officers and people in the community that had done a lot of great things, and hoped this would not set relations too far back.
Mr. Skala explained he had been out of town for almost two weeks without internet access, and had just recently become aware of this situation, which he believed was embarrassing. He noted he appreciated the comments of Mr. Matthes. The Facebook posts of Mr. Roberts did not speak well of him or help in the relationship between the community and its police officers. He pointed out his daughter was a seven year veteran on the Columbus, Ohio Police Department and he had graduated from the Citizens Police Academy, which involved several ride-a-longs and exposure to a TASER® for 30 seconds. He supported Mr. Matthes' support of the Columbia Police Department, and himself supported the Columbia Police Department in general. He suspected the perceptions related to crime were a result of continuously being bombarded with crime statistics. He commented that it was difficult to do anything about drive-by shootings of two different gangs shooting at each other, and agreed there were issues involving disparities in the community. He believed Columbia had a race problem, and noted there were indicators in the budget. He stated public safety along with infrastructure was prime movers of government, and he would argue public safety was a part of infrastructure. He thought they all needed to work together, and did not feel they should throw grenades to make a point. He commented that he planned to respond to the e-mails he had received when he was gone during the next couple of days.
Mr. Ruffin thanked Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp and Mr. Byndom for coming to the Council Meeting and sharing their thoughts, concerns, and responses to the budget and the issues plaguing the community as it had created an opportunity for the Council to become accountable for the decisions they would make within the next few weeks so they addressed some of these systemic issues. He also thanked Ms. Nauser for a thoughtful, passionate, and comprehensive response. He commented that as he reflected on the events of the past week or so, he felt the Facebook post had given new energy to the social equity discussion. He believed it revealed what they liked to ignore. He stated they all thought they lived in a cosmopolitan community where everyone was treated fairly and equally with opportunities for everyone, which was not necessarily the case. He commented that as he had presented the vision for social equity in the strategic plan of the City, he had met some resistance from people who did not believe it was necessary, but the comments that had been posted on Facebook had revealed that there was a problem in Columbia. He viewed this as an
25

City Council Minutes ­ 8/17/15 Meeting
unfortunate, embarrassing, and very sad state of affairs, but in looking at it in a deeper way, he realized it provided an opportunity to talk clearly about the problem instead of theoretically. It was real and it was in Columbia. He noted the positive was that the Council had the opportunity to do something about it instead of waiting for a grassroots movement to rise up. The Council had the leverage, latitude, budgets, ideas, connections, etc. to begin to address the problems immediately. He pointed out he only had two more years on the Council so he wanted to see something done to change the community by moving it in a more positive direction.
Mr. Thomas thanked Mr. Byndom and Ms. Wilson-Kleekamp for their eloquent comments, and for the incredibly difficult and important work they were doing since Sunday to maintain a respectful dialogue and manage a situation that could have gone in a different direction. He noted they had both influenced him personally in his understanding of race issues in Columbia and the United States. He asked them to continue doing the work they were doing, and to let him know what he could do to help. He explained they were specifically looking at the recommendations of the Task Force on Community Violence and would create an implementation checklist of those recommendations along with timelines, etc. He commented that he also appreciated the immediate comments of Mr. Matthes and supported those statements as well as him taking a step back in terms of the comment associated with not supporting additional funding for the police. He also thought they all deplored the original Facebook post.
Mayor McDavid stated he was fascinated by the cultural sensitivity seminar this community had recently undergone and the comments of people in the community to what he had found as offensive, insensitive, and divisive. He believed this incident had forced them to look into a mirror, and thought everyone should look in the mirror to include those that did not understand why this was an issue. He agreed with Mr. Ruffin in that this created a tremendous opportunity. In terms of the Columbia Police Department, he noted he had been the architect of the failed public safety ballot and had taken a lot of pride in stabilizing the pension plan. He stated he was absolutely committed to increasing public safety staffing. He noted, they had brave and disciplined men and women, who he was proud of in terms of what they did, and thought they needed more of them, but pointed out he believed those men and women needed better leadership. This was a sad circumstance, which he believed they would be better from by addressing it.
The meeting adjourned at 11:21 p.m. Respectfully submitted,
Sheela Amin City Clerk
26

